Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                      International Journal of Modern Physics D
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.  (2019) 1930022 (50 pages)
                                                                                                                                  c World Scientific Publishing Company
                                                                                                                                  DOI: 10.1142/S0218271819300222

                                                                                                                                                     The origin of Galactic cosmic rays: Challenges
                                                                                                                                                                    to the standard paradigm

                                                                                                                                                                                           Stefano Gabici
                                                                                                                                                                            APC, AstroParticule et Cosmologie,
                                                                                                                                                                 Universit´e Paris Diderot, CNRS/IN2P3, CEA/Irfu,
                                                                                                                                                                      Observatoire de Paris, Sorbonne Paris Cit´e,
                                                                                                                                                                          10, rue Alice Domon et L´eonie Duquet,

                                                                                                                                                                                75205 Paris Cedex 13, France
                                                                                                                                                                                        gabici@apc.in2p3.fr

                                                                                                                                                                                            Carmelo Evoli
                                                                                                                                                                                 Gran Sasso Science Institute,
                                                                                                                                                                         Viale F. Crispi 7, 67100 L'Aquila, Italy
                                                                                                                                                                      INFN/Laboratori Nazionali del Gran Sasso,
                                                                                                                                                                          Via G. Acitelli 22, Assergi (AQ), Italy

                                                                                                                                                                                          Daniele Gaggero
                                                                                                                                                                         Instituto de F´isica Teo´rica UAM-CSIC,
                                                                                                                                                                   Campus de Cantoblanco, E-28049 Madrid, Spain

                                                                                                                                                                                             Paolo Lipari
                                                                                                                                                                              INFN, Sezione Roma "Sapienza",
                                                                                                                                                                          Piazzale A. Moro 2, 00185 Roma, Italy

                                                                                                                                                                                          Philipp Mertsch
                                                                                                                                                       Institute for Theoretical Particle Physics and Cosmology (TTK),

                                                                                                                                                                RWTH Aachen University, 52056 Aachen, Germany

                                                                                                                                                                                           Elena Orlando
                                                                                                                                                           Kavli Institute for Particle Astrophysics and Cosmology and

                                                                                                                                                                        Hansen Experimental Physics Laboratory,
                                                                                                                                                                    Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA

                                                                                                                                                                      Department of Physics, University of Trieste
                                                                                                                                                                                        34127 Trieste, Italy

                                                                                                                                                                                           Andrew Strong
                                                                                                                                                                  Max Planck Institut fu¨r Extraterrestrische Physik,

                                                                                                                                                                      Postfach 1312, D-85741 Garching, Germany

                                                                                                                                                                                               1930022-1
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                      S. Gabici et al.
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                                                                           Andrea Vittino
                                                                                                                                                       Institute for Theoretical Particle Physics and Cosmology (TTK),

                                                                                                                                                                RWTH Aachen University, 52056 Aachen, Germany

                                                                                                                                                                                      Received 22 July 2019
                                                                                                                                                                                      Accepted 26 July 2019
                                                                                                                                                                                   Published 15 October 2019

                                                                                                                                        A critical review of the standard paradigm for the origin of Galactic cosmic rays (CRs)
                                                                                                                                        is presented. Recent measurements of local and far-away CRs reveal unexpected behav-
                                                                                                                                        iors, which challenge the commonly accepted scenario. These recent findings are dis-
                                                                                                                                        cussed, together with long-standing open issues. Despite the progress made thanks to
                                                                                                                                        ever-improving observational techniques and theoretical investigations, at present our
                                                                                                                                        understanding of the origin and of the behavior of CRs remains incomplete. We believe
                                                                                                                                        it is still unclear whether a modification of the standard paradigm, or rather a radical
                                                                                                                                        change of the paradigm itself is needed in order to interpret all the available data on
                                                                                                                                        CRs within a self-consistent scenario.

                                                                                                                                        Keywords: Cosmic rays; particle acceleration; particle propagation; gamma rays; the
                                                                                                                                        Galaxy.

                                                                                                                                        PACS Number(s): 96.50.S, 96.50.Tf, 13.85.Tp, 95.85.Ry

                                                                                                                                  1. Introduction

                                                                                                                                  The problem of the origin of Cosmic Rays (CRs) is a central one in high energy
                                                                                                                                  astrophysics. While it is firmly established that the bulk of CRs originates within
                                                                                                                                  the Galaxy, the way in which these particles are accelerated at their sources, as well
                                                                                                                                  as the way in which they are confined in the magnetized and turbulent interstellar
                                                                                                                                  medium (ISM) are still a matter of debate.

                                                                                                                                      An impressive amount of data of ever improving quality has been accumulated
                                                                                                                                  over a century of direct and indirect observations of CRs. According to the main-
                                                                                                                                  stream interpretation of these data, Galactic CR (GCR) nuclei are believed to be
                                                                                                                                  accelerated at supernova remnant (SNR) shocks via first-order Fermi mechanism
                                                                                                                                  and to be then somehow released into the ISM, where they reside for some time
                                                                                                                                  before escaping the Galaxy.

                                                                                                                                      The goal of this paper is to provide a critical review of this standard paradigm
                                                                                                                                  for the origin of GCRs. In the following, we describe in some detail the main aspects
                                                                                                                                  of the paradigm (Sec. 2), and we review the most recent direct and indirect obser-
                                                                                                                                  vations of CRs that are in tension with it (Sec. 3). In Sec. 4, we list the major
                                                                                                                                  difficulties encountered by the paradigm in explaining observations, and we con-
                                                                                                                                  clude in Sec. 5.

                                                                                                                                      For a more extended review on CRs the reader is referred to the excellent mono-
                                                                                                                                  graphs.1-3 The content of this review is based on a series of discussions that took
                                                                                                                                  place at the "The High-Energy universe: Gamma-Ray, Neutrino, and Cosmic-ray
                                                                                                                                  Astronomy" MIAPP workshop in 2018. See Ref. 4 for a companion paper on Ultra-
                                                                                                                                  High Energy CRs.

                                                                                                                                                                                               1930022-2
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                                                                                                             The origin of Galactic cosmic rays
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                  2. The Orthodoxy

                                                                                                                                  With orthodoxy we refer here to the ideas and assumptions which are most com-
                                                                                                                                  monly invoked to interpret the observations of CRs. These ideas and assumptions
                                                                                                                                  are briefly reviewed in the remainder of this section, and constitute a standard
                                                                                                                                  framework for CR studies which is broadly (though not unanimously!) accepted.
                                                                                                                                  In the following, we identify what are in our view the three pillars of the ortho-
                                                                                                                                  doxy (Secs. 2.1-2.3), and we discuss then two classical tests for CR origin based on
                                                                                                                                  very-high, and high-energy gamma-ray observations of SNRs, respectively (Secs. 2.4
                                                                                                                                  and 2.5). We focus here onto CR nuclei only, and we postpone the discussion of CR
                                                                                                                                  electrons and antiparticles to Secs. 3 and 4.

                                                                                                                                  2.1. The bulk of the energy of cosmic rays originates from
                                                                                                                                         supernova explosions in the Galactic disk

                                                                                                                                  The  measured  local  energy  density  of  CRs  is  w0       1 eV/cm3,  and  is  roughly

                                                                                                                                                                                         CR

                                                                                                                                  equal to the energy densities of the other components of the ISM (magnetic field,

                                                                                                                                  soft photon backgrounds, thermal gas and turbulent motions), although this does

                                                                                                                                  not necessarily imply energy equipartition in a physical sense. Before the recent

                                                                                                                                  observations performed by PAMELA and AMS02, the observed local spectrum of

                                                                                                                                  CR nuclei (largely dominated by protons) appeared to be consistent with a single
                                                                                                                                  power law in particle rigidity R = pc/(Ze), nCR(R)  R- of slope   2.7 spanning

                                                                                                                                  the remarkably broad energy range from the multi-GeV domain to a few PeV. The

                                                                                                                                  steepness of the spectrum implies that most of the CR energy density is carried

                                                                                                                                  by GeV protons and Helium nuclei. The Larmor radius of these particles, in the

                                                                                                                                  typical magnetic field of few µG found in the ISM, is of the order of  1012 cm,

                                                                                                                                  which is many orders of magnitude smaller than any typical Galactic length scale

                                                                                                                                  (e.g. coherence length of the ISM magnetic field, radius of the Galactic disk, etc.).

                                                                                                                                  This fact fits nicely with a scenario where CRs are accelerated within the Galaxy

                                                                                                                                  and effectively confined there.

                                                                                                                                  The confirmation of a Galactic origin of the bulk of CRs at least at GeV ener-

                                                                                                                                  gies came from gamma-ray observations. The bright diffuse gamma-ray emission

                                                                                                                                  detected in the GeV domain from the gaseous Galactic disk can be explained as

                                                                                                                                  the result of the decay of neutral pions produced in CR interactions with the gas,

                                                                                                                                  provided that the CR energy density and spectrum are roughly uniform throughout

                                                                                                                                  the entire Galactic disk. If CRs were universal (i.e. the CR intensity was the same

                                                                                                                                  everywhere in the universe) rather than Galactic one would expect to detect an ana-

                                                                                                                                  log diffuse-gamma-ray flux from external galaxies which would simply scale with the

                                                                                                                                  gaseous mass of the galaxy.5 The upper limit derived by EGRET on the gamma-ray

                                                                                                                                  flux from the Small Magellanic Cloud ruled out this possibility, and pointed toward

                                                                                                                                  a Galactic origin of the bulk of CRs.6 Fermi-LAT observations of LMC, SMC and

                                                                                                                                  M31 also confirm that the CR intensity is different from the Galaxy.7

                                                                                                                                  Even though a small radial gradient of the CR intensity in the Galaxy is indeed

                                                                                                                                  observed (and expected), to a reasonably good approximation the total energy in

                                                                                                                                                                         1930022-3
                                                                                                                                  S. Gabici et al.

                                                                                                                                  form  of  CRs     in  the  disk  can  be  estimated  as  WCR    w0     ×  Vd    1055 erg,  where

                                                                                                                                                                                                     CR

                                                                                                                                  Vd is the volume of the disk. To maintain a steady-state, the power that Galactic

                                                                                                                                  sources have to inject in the Galaxy in the form of CRs is PCR  WCR/res, where

Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                      res is the residence time of CRs in the disk and where we implicitly assumed that
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                  CRs sources are located within the disk.

                                                                                                                                      The way in which the residence time res is estimated is connected to striking
                                                                                                                                  features in the chemical composition of CRs.3 The light elements Li, Be, and B, and

                                                                                                                                  the sub-iron elements (Sc, Ti, V, Cr, and Mn) are overabundant by a many order

                                                                                                                                  of magnitude in CRs with respect to the solar system. This fact can be explained if

                                                                                                                                  such CR elements are secondaries, i.e. are produced in spallation reactions between

                                                                                                                                  primary CR nuclei and the ISM.

                                                                                                                                  In order to understand in a simple (and simplified) manner how res is extracted

                                                                                                                                  from CR data, consider a species s of CRs which is entirely secondary in nature

                                                                                                                                  (boron, for example), and that is mostly produced in spallation reactions involv-

                                                                                                                                  ing a heavier CR species p which, conversely, is mostly primary (like carbon). The

                                                                                                                                  production rate of species s can be written as qs( )  np( )nISMsc, where nISM

                                                                                                                                  is the density of the ISM, s is the relevant spallation cross-section, and c is the

                                                                                                                                  speed of light. In the expressions above, is the particle energy per nucleon, which

                                                                                                                                  is a (almost) conserved quantity in spallation reactions, and therefore will be omit-

                                                                                                                                  ted in the following. The equilibrium density of secondary CRs in the disk is then

                                                                                                                                  ns = qsres, which can be recast in terms of the grammage  = µmpnISMresc

                                                                                                                                  accumulated by CRs while residing in the Galactic disk, to eventually derive the

                                                                                                                                  important relation ns/np  s/µmp for the secondary-to-primary ratio, which is

                                                                                                                                  an observable quantity. In the expressions above µ is the mean atomic weight of

                                                                                                                                  the ISM (µ  1.4 for a hydrogen gas with 10% of helium) and mp the proton mass.

                                                                                                                                  Therefore, from the knowledge of the spallation cross-sections and from the mea-

                                                                                                                                  surement of the CR secondary-to-primary ratios (for example the B/C ratio), it is

                                                                                                                                  possible to conclude that GeV CRs have to accumulate a grammage of   10 g/cm2
                                                                                                                                  while residing within the disk. For the typical density of the ISM nISM  1 cm-3

                                                                                                                                  this translates into a residence time in the Galactic disk res of the order of few Myr.

                                                                                                                                  From the estimate of the residence time in the disk it is possible to compute

                                                                                                                                  the CR power of the Galaxy as PCR  1041 erg/s.8 It has to be stressed that

                                                                                                                                  the equivalence between grammage and Galactic residence time is a very strong

                                                                                                                                  (and not necessarily fully justified) assumption which constitutes a cornerstone

                                                                                                                                  of orthodoxy. Radically different pictures could be, in principle, envisaged. For

                                                                                                                                  example, the grammage could be entirely or partially accumulated by CRs inside or

                                                                                                                                  in the vicinity of their accelerators, rather than during their residence in the ISM.9

                                                                                                                                  Under these circumstances, the residence time in the disk would be decoupled from

                                                                                                                                  the grammage.

                                                                                                                                  The suggestion that supernova explosions could provide the energy needed to

                                                                                                                                  explain CRs was first proposed by Baade and Zwicky in 1934,10 even though their

                                                                                                                                  reasoning is now outdated (at that time CRs were thought to be extragalactic

                                                                                                                                  (EG)). The connection with Galactic supernovae was made after noticing that the

                                                                                                                                                                            1930022-4
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                                                                                                             The origin of Galactic cosmic rays
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                  total injection rate of mechanical energy into the ISM would be the product of
                                                                                                                                  the supernova explosion rate in the galaxy (about 3 per century) with the typical
                                                                                                                                  mechanical energy released during one of such explosions (the canonical 1051 erg).
                                                                                                                                  This amounts to  1042 erg/s and significantly exceeds PCR. Thus, a very plausible
                                                                                                                                  10% efficiency in the conversion between supernovae kinetic energy and CR energy
                                                                                                                                  has to be invoked in order to make this hypothesis viable.1,11

                                                                                                                                      Sources of energy other than stellar explosions have been proposed over the
                                                                                                                                  years to explain CRs, including explosive phenomena in the Galactic center1,12 and
                                                                                                                                  stellar winds.13 However, these scenarios seemed to be more problematic, and the
                                                                                                                                  assumption that CRs acquire their energy from Galactic stellar explosions became
                                                                                                                                  almost universally accepted very soon. Interestingly, as we will see in the following,
                                                                                                                                  both the Galactic center and stellar wind scenarios for the origin of GCRs have
                                                                                                                                  been recently revived based on gamma-ray observations.

                                                                                                                                  2.2. Cosmic rays are diffusively confined within an extended and
                                                                                                                                         magnetized Galactic halo

                                                                                                                                  A residence time in the Galactic disk res of the order of few million years cor-
                                                                                                                                  responds to a path traveled by CRs roughly equal to res = resc  1 Mpc. This
                                                                                                                                  length largely exceeds both the radius and the thickness of the disk. A possible way
                                                                                                                                  to reconcile these numbers is to assume that the motion of CRs is diffusive rather
                                                                                                                                  than rectilinear in the disk.

                                                                                                                                      In fact, another major constraint on CR propagation in the Galaxy can be
                                                                                                                                  obtained through the study of unstable secondaries such as the radioactive isotope
                                                                                                                                  10Be. This isotope is particularly suitable for these studies because its decay time,
                                                                                                                                   (10Be)  1.4 Myr, is of the same order of the residence time of CRs in the disk res.
                                                                                                                                  10Be is produced together with stable Be isotopes during CR spallation reactions
                                                                                                                                  in the disk, and its decay means that the observed ratio 10Be/Be is suppressed with
                                                                                                                                  respect to the production ratio, approximately by a factor of   (10Be)/esc, where
                                                                                                                                  esc is the escape time of CRs from the Galaxy. The measured value of the 10Be/Be
                                                                                                                                  ratio implies that esc  10-20 Myr,3 which significantly exceeds the residence time
                                                                                                                                  of CRs in the disk res!

                                                                                                                                      This apparent discrepancy is solved by assuming that CRs are diffusively con-
                                                                                                                                  fined within a magnetized Galactic halo, whose volume is much larger than that
                                                                                                                                  of the disk. In this scenario, the effectiveness of spallation reactions is strongly
                                                                                                                                  reduced while CRs reside in the halo, due to the very low gas density there, and
                                                                                                                                  the grammage is entirely accumulated by CRs during repeated crossings of the thin
                                                                                                                                  gaseous Galactic disk.

                                                                                                                                      An estimate of the typical value of the diffusion coefficient of CRs D0 in the
                                                                                                                                  halo can now be obtained by considering the Galaxy (disk plus halo) as a box
                                                                                                                                  characterized by an average gas density ¯ = µmpnISM(h/H), where h  100 pc and
                                                                                                                                  H (a priori unknown) are the thicknesses of the disk and halo, respectively. In such
                                                                                                                                  a box, the grammage accumulated over a time esc  H2/D0 is  = ¯escc which

                                                                                                                                                                                               1930022-5
                                                                                                                                  S. Gabici et al.

                                                                                                                                  can be inverted to get

                                                                                                                                                    D0  3 × 10  28 H   2 -1            (1)
                                                                                                                                                                             2 cm /s.
                                                                                                                                                                5 kpc 10 g/cm
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.  The estimate of D0 depends on the poorly constrained thickness of the halo, and
                                                                                                                                  has to be considered as a typical value representative of the entire volume of con-

                                                                                                                                  tainment.

                                                                                                                                      Such an estimate of the CR diffusion coefficient refers to the bulk of CRs, which

                                                                                                                                  have a particle energy of 1 GeV, but the same procedure can be repeated for

                                                                                                                                  particles of different energies, leading to an energy-dependent estimate of both the

                                                                                                                                  escape time from the Galaxy esc and the residence time in the disk res. Within this
                                                                                                                                  context, it is more appropriate to express the CR diffusion coefficient as a function
                                                                                                                                  of the particle rigidity R (particles of the same rigidity follow the same trajectories
                                                                                                                                  through an arbitrary magnetic field) as: D = D0(R/R0), where  is the particle
                                                                                                                                  velocity in units of the speed of light. Various analyses of CR and gamma-ray data
                                                                                                                                  gave as best fit parameters   0.3-0.6 and D0  1028-1029 cm2/s for R0 equal to
                                                                                                                                  few GV.14-17

                                                                                                                                      An important prediction of any diffusive model for CRs is the presence of a

                                                                                                                                  small dipole anisotropy in the arrival direction of CRs at a level of the order
                                                                                                                                  of a = (3 D0/c)|nCR|/nCR where nCR is the CR space density.1 Taking L
                                                                                                                                  to be the typical scale of the CR gradient over large Galactic scales one gets
                                                                                                                                  a  10-4(D0/1028 cm2/s)(L/3 kpc)-1. However, the role of nearby sources of CRs
                                                                                                                                  has to be taken into account carefully, since it might dominate the anisotropy.

                                                                                                                                  Moreover, the very weak dependence of the observed anisotropy on particle energy

                                                                                                                                  seems to point toward an equally weak dependence on energy of the CR diffusion
                                                                                                                                  coefficient (  0.3).18 (See Sec. 3.2 for more details.)

                                                                                                                                  2.3. Cosmic rays are accelerated out of the (dusty ) interstellar
                                                                                                                                         medium through diffusive shock acceleration in supernova
                                                                                                                                         remnants

                                                                                                                                  In order to keep the CR intensity in the Galaxy at the observed level, the injection
                                                                                                                                  rate of CRs of a given energy E in the ISM qCR(E)  E- should balance the rate at
                                                                                                                                  which CRs leave the Galaxy. This can be expressed as qCR(E) = nCR(E)/esc(E) 
                                                                                                                                  nCR(E)D(E)  E-+. Given that   2.7 and   0.3-0.6 one gets qCR(E) 
                                                                                                                                  E-2.1...2.4. Thus, CR sources have to inject particles in the ISM with a power law
                                                                                                                                  spectrum somewhat steeper than E-2. Since such a spectral index is quite close to
                                                                                                                                  the test-particle prediction of diffusive shock acceleration theory,19-22 the idea that
                                                                                                                                  SNR shocks are the acceleration sites of GCRs became very broadly accepted.

                                                                                                                                      In fact, diffusive shock acceleration theory predicts, in the test particle limit,
                                                                                                                                  CR spectra at strong shocks which are power laws with slope identical to E-2, and
                                                                                                                                  a number of theoretical arguments seem to indicate that this should be also the
                                                                                                                                  shape of the spectrum of the CRs which escape SNRs and are eventually injected

                                                                                                                                                                                               1930022-6
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                                                                                                             The origin of Galactic cosmic rays
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                  in the ISM.23,24 These predictions of diffusive shock acceleration theory are in
                                                                                                                                  tension with the requirements derived from the observations of local CRs described
                                                                                                                                  above and from the observations in the gamma-ray domain of SNRs,25-27 both
                                                                                                                                  pointing to spectra of CRs steeper than E-2. This discrepancy might be reconciled
                                                                                                                                  by relaxing the test-particle assumption and considering the effects of CRs on the
                                                                                                                                  shock structure. One of the most prominent effects of the CR feedback on shocks is a
                                                                                                                                  dramatic amplification of the turbulent magnetic field,28 which could in turn impact
                                                                                                                                  onto the acceleration process. For example, if the magnetic field is significantly
                                                                                                                                  amplified, the Alfv´en speed of the plasma increases accordingly. If Alfv´en waves are
                                                                                                                                  the main scattering agents of CRs at shocks, their enhanced motion (called "Alfv´en
                                                                                                                                  drift") may lead to the formation of particle spectra significantly steeper than
                                                                                                                                  E-2.29-31 Also the effect of the presence of neutral particles in the gas swept up by
                                                                                                                                  the SNR shock may lead to a steepening of the spectrum of accelerated particles.32
                                                                                                                                  However, these theoretical predictions should be taken with some caution, given
                                                                                                                                  that a fully self-consistent picture of the acceleration and escape of particles from
                                                                                                                                  SNR shocks is still missing.33

                                                                                                                                      Finally, any satisfactory theory of CR origin must explain the observed chemical
                                                                                                                                  composition of these particles.

                                                                                                                                      Overall, the CR chemical composition follows quite closely the solar one, with
                                                                                                                                  the above-mentioned conspicuous exceptions of light and sub-iron elements, which
                                                                                                                                  are many orders of magnitude overabundant in CRs and result from nuclear spalla-
                                                                                                                                  tion reactions of CRs with interstellar matter. Less pronounced, but still significant
                                                                                                                                  differences include the overabundance of CR nuclei with Z > 2 with respect to H
                                                                                                                                  and He, and of refractory elements over volatiles.34 Refractory elements are mainly
                                                                                                                                  found condensed in dust grains, while volatiles are mainly in the gas phase of
                                                                                                                                  the ISM. While the former difference remains unexplained, the latter seems to be
                                                                                                                                  related to atomic properties, rather than nuclear processes.35 In particular, data can
                                                                                                                                  be explained satisfactorily by an acceleration mechanism whose efficiency increases
                                                                                                                                  with the particle mass-to-charge ratio, resulting in a preferential acceleration of
                                                                                                                                  charged dust grains over atomic nuclei. In such a scenario the overabundance of
                                                                                                                                  refractory elements would result from the sputtering of accelerated dust grains at
                                                                                                                                  shocks (for details see Refs. 36 and 37). This demonstrates that dust plays a crucial
                                                                                                                                  role in the determination of the chemical composition of GCRs.

                                                                                                                                  2.4. Very-high-energy gamma rays from supernova remnants:
                                                                                                                                         A classic test for cosmic-ray origin

                                                                                                                                  A classic test of the supernova paradigm for the origin of CRs is based on gamma-
                                                                                                                                  ray observations of SNRs.38 SNRs can explain CRs if on average  10% of each
                                                                                                                                  parent supernova explosion energy ( 1051 erg) is converted into accelerated par-
                                                                                                                                  ticles with a power law spectrum in energy with slope slightly steeper than 2. If
                                                                                                                                  these conditions are satisfied one can predict in an almost model-independent way
                                                                                                                                  the typical gamma-ray luminosity of SNRs due to proton-proton interactions of

                                                                                                                                                                                               1930022-7
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                      S. Gabici et al.
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                  accelerated CRs with the ambient medium compressed at the SNR shock. Such
                                                                                                                                  a prediction will depend only on the ambient density in the Galactic disk, whose
                                                                                                                                  average value is nISM  0.1 . . . 1 cm-3.

                                                                                                                                      Several SNRs have been detected in gamma rays both in the GeV39 and TeV40
                                                                                                                                  energy domain, with gamma-ray fluxes comparable to the above-mentioned predic-
                                                                                                                                  tions. However, the detection of gamma rays from SNRs does not necessarily mean
                                                                                                                                  that CR protons are accelerated in these objects, because inverse Compton scatter-
                                                                                                                                  ing of accelerated electrons off soft ambient photons might also explain observations.
                                                                                                                                  A prototypical example is the SNR RX J1713.7-3946,41,42 whose gamma-ray emis-
                                                                                                                                  sion could be explained either in a leptonic43 or hadronic44 scenario.

                                                                                                                                      The predictions of the SNR paradigm have been tested also against the results
                                                                                                                                  obtained from the survey of the Galactic plane performed by H.E.S.S., which covers
                                                                                                                                  the interval of Galactic coordinates 350 < l < 65 and |b| < 3 down to a TeV
                                                                                                                                  gamma-ray flux level of 1.5% Crab units.45 The number of firmly identified SNRs
                                                                                                                                  in the survey is 8, which is consistent with the expectations of the SNR paradigm.46
                                                                                                                                  Even though the agreement between predictions and observations is encouraging,
                                                                                                                                  it should be kept in mind that such agreement constitutes a necessary but not
                                                                                                                                  sufficient conditions for the validity of the SNR paradigm. First of all, the exact
                                                                                                                                  number of SNRs detected in the survey is quite uncertain. In addition to the firm
                                                                                                                                  associations, eight more objects have been associated to composite SNRs, which
                                                                                                                                  exhibit sboth a shell-like and a pulsar wind nebula-like emission. Moreover, more
                                                                                                                                  than half of the sources are not firmly identified or not identified at all (47 over
                                                                                                                                  78). Second, the relative contribution to the gamma-ray emission from pion decay
                                                                                                                                  and inverse Compton scattering remains uncertain, and a significant contribution
                                                                                                                                  from the latter cannot be ruled out. Future observations of SNRs with the C erenkov
                                                                                                                                  Telescope Array will certainly reduce such uncertainties, and might finally prove or
                                                                                                                                  falsify the SNR paradigm for the origin of CRs.47

                                                                                                                                      The advent of gamma-ray facilities of superior sensitivity such as the C herenkov
                                                                                                                                  Telescope Array will also pave the way for another promising means to reveal the
                                                                                                                                  acceleration of hadrons at SNRs. This can be done by searching for the gamma-
                                                                                                                                  ray emission produced in the vicinity of SNRs due to proton-proton interactions
                                                                                                                                  between CRs escaping the SNR shock (runaway CRs) and the surrounding medium.
                                                                                                                                  Such hadronic emission is amplified if a massive molecular cloud is located in the
                                                                                                                                  proximity of the SNR. To date, only at most a couple of clear cases of molecular
                                                                                                                                  clouds illuminated by runaway CRs are known, and increasing the statistics of
                                                                                                                                  detections is of paramount importance since this might provide a proof for the
                                                                                                                                  acceleration of CR hadrons at SNRs (see Refs. 48 or 49 for a review).

                                                                                                                                  2.5. High-energy gamma rays from SNRs: The pion-bump

                                                                                                                                  As seen above, many SNRs have been studied in gamma rays, with excellent spectral
                                                                                                                                  information from both satellite and C erenkov instruments. Frequently the phrase

                                                                                                                                                                                               1930022-8
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                                                                                                             The origin of Galactic cosmic rays
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                  "pion bump" or "pion peak" is used, referring to the maximum in the o-decay
                                                                                                                                  spectrum from hadronic interactions, and cited as "proof" of hadronic CRs in
                                                                                                                                  SNRs. However, this is very misleading: the peak is at one-half of the o mass,
                                                                                                                                  i.e. 67.5 MeV, and the (differential) gamma-ray energy spectrum is in fact symmet-
                                                                                                                                  rical on a log-energy scale independent of the proton (and Helium) spectra which
                                                                                                                                  determine the o spectrum. This is a simple consequences of the isotropic decay in
                                                                                                                                  the o rest frame and the Lorentz transformation. A detailed analysis can be found
                                                                                                                                  in the book by Floyd Stecker.a The peak energy is however below the limit reached
                                                                                                                                  by Fermi-LAT in current analyses, which is about 100 MeV; to really see the peak
                                                                                                                                  would need a spectral measurement extending below the maximum, say to 40 MeV
                                                                                                                                  at least. The AGILE instrument has spectra extending to slightly lower energies
                                                                                                                                  but the same argument applies.

                                                                                                                                      Why then is the pion bump often invoked? It seems that it is because the
                                                                                                                                  spectrum is normally presented with a factor E2 to reflect the energy distribution
                                                                                                                                  and improve the readability of the data (which is quite in order and standard
                                                                                                                                  practice). Then the spectra do indeed often show a peak around 1 GeV, and this
                                                                                                                                  seems often thought to be (hearing people's comments) the shifted pion bump
                                                                                                                                  to higher energies due to the E2 factor. However, if the peak is not in the raw
                                                                                                                                  differential flux spectrum, multiplying by this factor cannot make it appear! The
                                                                                                                                  observed peak is in fact usually due to the fact that the gamma-ray spectrum
                                                                                                                                  reflects a proton spectrum with a break in the several GeV range.

                                                                                                                                      To illustrate this explicitly, in Ref. 50 two sample SNR spectra were taken from
                                                                                                                                  the literature (W4451,52 and W49B53) and replotted with the E2 factor removed.
                                                                                                                                  Then there is no pion bump visible since it lies below the minimum energy measured.

                                                                                                                                      Of course the proper procedure is to make explicit models of the hadronic and
                                                                                                                                  leptonic emission, and there are many examples where this is done, but the inter-
                                                                                                                                  pretation is necessarily model-dependent. An example where the combination of
                                                                                                                                  gamma-ray and synchrotron data favors a mainly leptonic model is RCW 86.54
                                                                                                                                  The "smoking gun" pion bump will have to await extension of Fermi-LAT analy-
                                                                                                                                  sis to lower energies, which is indeed foreseen in the new "Pass 8" event analysis
                                                                                                                                  (although this is difficult because of the broad angular response at low energies),
                                                                                                                                  and future experiments (e.g. COSI, eAstrogam) which extend into the low MeV
                                                                                                                                  range.

                                                                                                                                  3. Recent Observations Confront Orthodoxy

                                                                                                                                  In this section, we review a number of recent direct and indirect observations of
                                                                                                                                  GCRs. We put particular emphasis onto those observations that constitute a chal-
                                                                                                                                  lenge to the standard scenario described above.

                                                                                                                                  aCosmic Gamma Rays, available at https://ntrs.nasa.gov/archive/nasa/casi.ntrs.nasa.gov/
                                                                                                                                  19710015288.pdf, see Chaps. 1-6 and 5-2.

                                                                                                                                                                                               1930022-9
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                      S. Gabici et al.
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                  3.1. Spectral anomalies in recent observations of local cosmic rays

                                                                                                                                  3.1.1. Spectral anomalies for cosmic-ray nuclei

                                                                                                                                  The last few years have seen improvements in our knowledge of CR energy spectra.
                                                                                                                                  In particular, the orthodox picture of a universal injection spectrum of Galactic
                                                                                                                                  sources (as far as primary species are concerned) and a power law scaling of the CR
                                                                                                                                  diffusion coefficient with energy, both without any features up to the CR knee, has
                                                                                                                                  been undermined by more precise measurements of individual CR spectra by a num-
                                                                                                                                  ber of CR experiments: ATIC,55 AMS,56,57 BESS,58 CREAM59 and PAMELA.60

                                                                                                                                      In particular, PAMELA first, and AMS02 later on with increasing precision,
                                                                                                                                  have robustly highlighted a new situation with respect to what was routinely
                                                                                                                                  assumed before then. The two key observational results that these experiments
                                                                                                                                  have pointed out are:

                                                                                                                                  · The propagated proton spectrum is distinctly softer (  -0.1) than that of
                                                                                                                                     helium at all energies.

                                                                                                                                  · Both spectra show a spectral hardening (with change in spectral index of  0.13)
                                                                                                                                     around  300 GV.

                                                                                                                                      Carbon and oxygen are the most abundant nuclei heavier than helium in CR
                                                                                                                                  fluxes. Recently AMS02 reported precise measurements of their fluxes up to 3 TV.
                                                                                                                                  The rigidity dependence of the helium, carbon, and oxygen spectral indices is very
                                                                                                                                  similar. In particular, all spectral indices harden at around the same rigidity and
                                                                                                                                  with the same change of slope as for H and He (see Fig. 1). Additionally, the
                                                                                                                                  hardening allows one to reconcile earlier low-energy measurements with the high-
                                                                                                                                  energy trends reported by CREAM.

                                                                                                                                      The spectral indices of carbon, oxygen and helium are identical within the mea-
                                                                                                                                  surement errors above  60 GV, meanwhile the ratios He/O and C/O exhibit a soft
                                                                                                                                  decrease with rigidity below that value. These trends confirm expectations based
                                                                                                                                  on the standard picture in which CRs are injected with the same spectrum at the
                                                                                                                                  source and are affected by transport effects in the ISM in the same way. The only
                                                                                                                                  (tiny) difference among the primary species is in their fragmentation rate (roughly
                                                                                                                                  proportional to A0.7) and that Carbon has a not-negligible secondary contribution
                                                                                                                                  from Oxygen fragmentation.61

                                                                                                                                      The spectral difference between protons and helium is still not understood and
                                                                                                                                  several explanations have been put forward.

                                                                                                                                      In terms of transport, the only difference between the two species is that helium
                                                                                                                                  fragments in the ISM. In fact, at energies where the helium fragmentation is faster
                                                                                                                                  than galactic escape the helium spectrum is expected to be slightly harder than
                                                                                                                                  proton one. However, 4He spallation is dominated by fragmentation into 3He which
                                                                                                                                  does not harden the total He spectrum. It can been shown that, when the escape
                                                                                                                                  time is set to reproduce the B/C, this effect should disappear at  50 GeV and
                                                                                                                                  therefore is not sufficient to explain the different slopes observed by AMS-02 up
                                                                                                                                  to  2 TV.61 Therefore, transport properties of CRs seem unable to explain the

                                                                                                                                                                                              1930022-10
                                                                                                                                                          The origin of Galactic cosmic rays

                                                                                                                                  15000                        AMS02
                                                                                                                                                               PAMELA
                                                                                                                                  10000 H
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.   5000

                                R2.7 flux [GV1.7 m2 s sr]-1                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                   4000

                                                                                                                                  3000 He

                                                                                                                                   2000
                                                                                                                                   1000

                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                      15

                                                                                                                                          Li

                                                                                                                                      10

                                                                                                                                       5

                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                       8

                                                                                                                                     6 Be

                                                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                       0

                                                                                                                                    20 B

                                                                                                                                      15
                                                                                                                                      10
                                                                                                                                       5
                                                                                                                                       0

                                                                                                                                   100 C

                                                                                                                                      50

                                                                                                                                   0

                                                                                                                                  20 N

                                                                                                                                  10

                                                                                                                                  0

                                                                                                                                  100 O

                                                                                                                                  50

                                                                                                                                  0               102     103          104

                                                                                                                                      1       10

                                                                                                                                                  R [GV]

                                                                                                                                Fig. 1. The individual CR flux for nuclear species up to Oxygen as measured by PAMELA and
                                                                                                                                AMS02. Shadow regions correspond to 1 sigma total errors (systematic and statistical added in
                                                                                                                                quadrature).

                                                                                                                                difference between H and He spectra, unless quite radical departures from the stan-
                                                                                                                                dard scenario are invoked, such as a decoupling of the escape timescale from the
                                                                                                                                grammage needed to reproduce B/C.

                                                                                                                                    At the moment it is then reasonable to assume that the solution to this puzzle
                                                                                                                                is a matter of acceleration or escape from the sources. Specific modifications of the
                                                                                                                                diffusive shock acceleration mechanism have been proposed. A spectral difference
                                                                                                                                between protons and helium is expected if they are injected and accelerated at
                                                                                                                                different stages of the source evolution. These scenarios may involve a shock whose
                                                                                                                                velocity decreases with time. Thus, helium must be mostly accelerated early on
                                                                                                                                (when the Mach number M is much larger than 1, and the spectrum of accelerated
                                                                                                                                particles is harder) while protons should be injected predominantly when M is
                                                                                                                                lower.62 That could be the case for nonuniform helium distribution in the medium
                                                                                                                                surrounding the accelerators.63 Even though these elements are omnipresent in the
                                                                                                                                ISM with almost constant abundance ratio, such a particular configuration might

                                                                                                                                                                                            1930022-11
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                      S. Gabici et al.
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                  be achieved inside superbubbles. Another class of models assume that He ions are
                                                                                                                                  preferentially injected with respect to protons when the shock is stronger given the
                                                                                                                                  larger He gyroradius downstream the shock.64 This possibility is still under debate
                                                                                                                                  given our poor knowledge of the injection efficiency as a function of environmental
                                                                                                                                  parameters. To this end, it has been shown by means of numerical simulations in
                                                                                                                                  Ref. 65 that the efficiency of injection increases with A/Z and peaks around M  5
                                                                                                                                  such that, when convoluted with the shock time dependence, it allows to reproduce
                                                                                                                                  the AMS-02 data.

                                                                                                                                      From all these mechanisms, the p/He ratio is expected to decrease steadily
                                                                                                                                  up to the maximum rigidity attainable by the accelerators. However, Ref. 66 has
                                                                                                                                  noticed that the existing data at higher energies show no evidence of spectral dif-
                                                                                                                                  ferences between protons and He, although the large discrepancy among the data
                                                                                                                                  from different experiments does not allow to reach firm conclusions. Alternative
                                                                                                                                  explanations able to reproduce the high-energy flattening for the p/He ratio, are
                                                                                                                                  based on distinct populations of sources, hydrogen rich ones producing rather softer
                                                                                                                                  spectra (presumably a nearby SNR characterized by a soft acceleration spectrum)
                                                                                                                                  and helium rich ones producing systematically harder ones.66

                                                                                                                                      Let us consider now the spectral break (hardening) observed for primary nuclei
                                                                                                                                  at a rigidity of  300 GV. This feature could be explained either in terms of trans-
                                                                                                                                  port properties of CRs in the Galaxy (e.g. a feature in the CR diffusion coeffi-
                                                                                                                                  cient),67-69 or in terms of a break in the overall spectrum of CRs injected in the
                                                                                                                                  ISM.31,70-72

                                                                                                                                      The question about the origin of the break can find an answer thanks to precise
                                                                                                                                  measurements of secondary spallation nuclei. In fact, if it were due to a pure propa-
                                                                                                                                  gation effect, the break in the secondary spectra would be twice as pronounced than
                                                                                                                                  that in the primary spectra, swhile it should be the same if the break is present
                                                                                                                                  in the injection spectrum. In Ref. 73, using boron to carbon ratio data recently
                                                                                                                                  released by AMS02 experiment up to TeV energies, the authors found evidence
                                                                                                                                  in favor of a diffusive propagation origin for the broken power-law spectra found in
                                                                                                                                  primary species. More recently, the AMS02 measurements of the absolute spectra
                                                                                                                                  of secondary species, Li, Be and B, confirm that the spectral slopes above the break
                                                                                                                                  are compatible with this hypothesis.74

                                                                                                                                      The origin of the feature in the diffusion coefficient invoked to reproduce the data
                                                                                                                                  could have different origins. In Ref. 69, it was assumed that the diffusion coefficient
                                                                                                                                  is a nonfactorizable function of rigidity and space and, in particular, the rigidity
                                                                                                                                  dependence of diffusion in the region close to the Galactic disk is different than in
                                                                                                                                  the outer diffusive halo. These models can find a physical justification in the fact
                                                                                                                                  that in the inner zone SNR-driven turbulence should dominate, while the turbulence
                                                                                                                                  in the halo (which is more relevant for low-energy CRs) is of different origin.

                                                                                                                                      An alternative model is the one introduced in Ref. 75, where the turbulence
                                                                                                                                  scattering CRs is described by two components: the external turbulence (as tra-
                                                                                                                                  ditionally argued to be injected by SNRs) with a Kolmogorov spectrum, and the
                                                                                                                                  waves generated by CRs themselves via the streaming instability.76 In particular,

                                                                                                                                                                                              1930022-12
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                                                                                                             The origin of Galactic cosmic rays
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                  CRs above the break diffuse on external turbulence, while self-generated turbulence
                                                                                                                                  dominates at lower rigidities. A simple estimate shows that the nonlinear damping
                                                                                                                                  rate of Alfv´en waves equals the CR streaming instability growth rate at a rigid-
                                                                                                                                  ity of 200-300 GV, for fiducial values of Galactic parameters, tantalizingly close to
                                                                                                                                  the rigidity of the break. Remarkably, this fact was noticed in Ref. 77 well before
                                                                                                                                  PAMELA and AMS02 data were available. A more complete treatment, including
                                                                                                                                  wave advection from the Galactic disk where the sources of CRs and turbulence are
                                                                                                                                  assumed to be located, showed that the halo naturally arises from these phenom-
                                                                                                                                  ena, with a size of a few kiloparsecs, compatible with the value that typically best
                                                                                                                                  fits observations in parametric approaches to CR diffusion.78

                                                                                                                                      These models derive from an improved microphysics description of the CR prop-
                                                                                                                                  agation problem, however this is not yet well known and different aspects (e.g., the
                                                                                                                                  presence of neutral region where the waves are rapidly damped, the anisotropy of
                                                                                                                                  the turbulent cascade, etc.) must be clarified.

                                                                                                                                  3.1.2. The peak in the B/C ratio: How important is diffusive reacceleration
                                                                                                                                          of cosmic rays?

                                                                                                                                  The CR secondary-to-primary ratio, in particular B/C, shows a peak in energy at
                                                                                                                                  a few GeV. In older times this was modeled with an ad hoc break in the grammage
                                                                                                                                  or diffusion coefficient, but a physical origin has been proposed as the diffusion
                                                                                                                                  in momentum which is expected at some level if the scattering entities for spa-
                                                                                                                                  tial diffusion are also moving. This is referred to as diffusive reacceleration (DR).
                                                                                                                                  For a detailed account see Ref. 79. See also Ref. 80 where a simple derivation of
                                                                                                                                  the approximate relation between spatial and momentum diffusion coefficients at
                                                                                                                                  momentum p : DxxDpp  p2Va2/9 (where Va is the Alfv´en speed) as well as the full
                                                                                                                                  formulae are given.

                                                                                                                                      While DR can give a good fit to B/C and other secondary-to-primary ratios, and
                                                                                                                                  allows a more Kolmogorov-like exponent (1/3) in the Dxx(p) law, and hence helps
                                                                                                                                  to avoid too large anisotropy when extrapolated to higher energies, the question
                                                                                                                                  arises whether it really occurs at the level required for this to work.

                                                                                                                                      In Ref. 79, both analytical and numerical (GALPROP) methods were used to
                                                                                                                                  estimate the energy injection from DR for typical values of the parameter Va 
                                                                                                                                  30 km s-1 required by B/C, and found that 30-50% of the total energy of CR
                                                                                                                                  then actually comes from the ISM via DR, and not from the usual sources such as
                                                                                                                                  SNR! This refers to energies around a few GeV where most of the CR energy is
                                                                                                                                  concentrated.

                                                                                                                                      So while not excluded, our conclusion is that DR should not be invoked just
                                                                                                                                  because it gives a good fit to CR data, but should be considered critically along
                                                                                                                                  with other possible origins for the shape of B/C.

                                                                                                                                      These include convection via a Galactic wind, which produces an energy-
                                                                                                                                  independent term in the propagation equation and hence dominates at low ener-
                                                                                                                                  gies where diffusion becomes small under the usual momentum-dependent law

                                                                                                                                                                                              1930022-13
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                      S. Gabici et al.
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                  Dxx(p) = p where  = 0.3-0.5. Note that in any case the velocity term in the
                                                                                                                                  secondary-production rate means that B/C decreases below 1 GeV as  = v/c < 1,
                                                                                                                                  (although this may be partly cancelled by the velocity term in Dxx(p)) and that
                                                                                                                                  the observed B/C has the rather uncertain effect of solar modulation as well.

                                                                                                                                      Another scenario that allows to reproduce B/C data features as a key ingredient
                                                                                                                                  an effective damping of the diffusion coefficient at energies around  1 GeV/n. In
                                                                                                                                  that picture, secondary/primary ratios can be reproduced with a smaller contribu-
                                                                                                                                  tion of diffusive reacceleration and with a Kraichanan-like behavior of the diffusion
                                                                                                                                  coefficient. The damping of the diffusion coefficient at the B/C peak has been intro-
                                                                                                                                  duced on phenomenological basis to reproduce the data in Refs. 81 and 82. From a
                                                                                                                                  theoretical point of view, such behavior is expected in the context of models that
                                                                                                                                  capture the resonant interaction between CRs and MHD waves, which results in a
                                                                                                                                  significant dissipation of such waves.83,84 As pointed out in Ref. 85, different effec-
                                                                                                                                  tive parametrizations of the CR transport problem, including either strong reaccel-
                                                                                                                                  eration, advection, or an alteration of the diffusion coefficient at low energy, can pro-
                                                                                                                                  vide reasonably good overall fits of all the hadronic CR fluxes measured by AMS-02.

                                                                                                                                      While DR should occur at some level on physical grounds, it probably does not
                                                                                                                                  suffice to explain B/C; in any case experimental checks using other CR indicators
                                                                                                                                  would be valuable. Up to now we were unable to think of any critical tests however.
                                                                                                                                  Meanwhile other mechanisms like convection should be considered at least on equal
                                                                                                                                  terms with DR.

                                                                                                                                  3.1.3. A prominent break in the cosmic-ray electron spectrum

                                                                                                                                  The lepton component (e+ + e-) accounts for about 1% of CRs. Secondary elec-
                                                                                                                                  trons and positrons are produced in interactions of CR nuclei with the interstellar
                                                                                                                                  gas, through the ±  µ± + · · ·  e± + · · · decay chains. Since approximately
                                                                                                                                  equal amounts of e- and e+ are expected from such processes, the observed over-
                                                                                                                                  abundance of e- over e+ in CRs indicates that most of electrons have a primary
                                                                                                                                  origin. Moreover, observations of X-ray and TeV gamma-ray emission from SNRs
                                                                                                                                  provide clear evidence for the acceleration of electrons in SNR shocks up to energies
                                                                                                                                  of about  100 TeV.25

                                                                                                                                      The inclusive lepton (e+ + e-) spectrum was measured by Fermi-LAT to fol-
                                                                                                                                  low a power law with spectral index -3.08 ± 0.05 in the energy range between
                                                                                                                                  7 GeV and 2 TeV.86 More recently, with almost seven years of Pass 8 data, the
                                                                                                                                  measurements were tentatively fitted by a broken power law with an energy
                                                                                                                                  break at Eb = (53 ± 8) GeV and spectral indices below and above the break of
                                                                                                                                   = -3.21 ± 0.02 and  = -3.07 ± 0.02. The break is however not statistically sig-
                                                                                                                                  nificant when the systematic uncertainty on the energy measurement is taken into
                                                                                                                                  account. As far as CR electrons are concerned, PAMELA was the first experiment
                                                                                                                                  to identify electrons above 50 GeV. The reported measurements of the e- spec-
                                                                                                                                  trum between 30 GeV and 625 GeV were well described by a single power law with
                                                                                                                                  spectral index -3.18 ± 0.05 and no significant spectral features within the errors.

                                                                                                                                                                                              1930022-14
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                                                                                                             The origin of Galactic cosmic rays
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                      More recently, AMS02 reported the most precise measurement to date of
                                                                                                                                  the fluxes of CR e-, and e+ + e- in Refs. 87 and 88. Consistent with previ-
                                                                                                                                  ous measurements, no structures were observed in the e+ + e- spectrum that
                                                                                                                                  can be described by a single power law above 30 GeV with spectral index  =
                                                                                                                                  -3.170 ± 0.008 (stat + syst) ± 0.008 (energy scale). On the contrary, the electron
                                                                                                                                  spectrum cannot be fitted with a single power law over the energy range that
                                                                                                                                  is not affected by solar modulation (> 10 GeV). In fact, it turned out that the
                                                                                                                                  spectral index e- has an energy dependence and that the spectrum hardens at
                                                                                                                                   30 GeV.

                                                                                                                                      The observed electron spectrum is thus much steeper than that of protons.
                                                                                                                                  Unlike the hadronic CR component, electrons suffer significant energy losses when
                                                                                                                                  propagating in the Galaxy, but even accounting for this it is necessary to consider
                                                                                                                                  a different injection spectrum for electrons and protons89-91 in order to reproduce
                                                                                                                                  the local electron spectrum. This might indicate either that CR protons and elec-
                                                                                                                                  trons are released by the same sources with a different spectrum, or that they are
                                                                                                                                  accelerated in different sources.

                                                                                                                                      H.E.S.S. was the first experiment to extend the measurement of the lepton
                                                                                                                                  spectrum beyond the range accessible to direct measurements.92 In Ref. 93, they
                                                                                                                                  reported evidence for a steepening in the energy spectrum at about 1 TeV. The most
                                                                                                                                  recently presented data show that the steepening is very sharp with the spectral
                                                                                                                                  index changing from  = -3.04 to  = -3.78.94 Moreover, the spectrum continues
                                                                                                                                  without further attenuation up to a particle energy of about 20 TeV. Observations
                                                                                                                                  by VERITAS confirmed the presence of the break.95 A very important implication
                                                                                                                                  of these observations is that, since the energy loss time of 20 TeV electrons in the
                                                                                                                                  Galaxy is extremely short, such particles must have been accelerated very recently.
                                                                                                                                  If this constraint is used together with the benchmark value of the CR diffusion
                                                                                                                                  coefficient (i.e. derived from B/C), one can conclude that 20 TeV electrons must
                                                                                                                                  have been produced in our very local neighborhood ( 100 pc).96-98

                                                                                                                                      Following that, CALET and DAMPE experiments performed this measurement
                                                                                                                                  up to a particle energy of 5 TeV with high level of precision providing further
                                                                                                                                  evidence for a break in the spectrum at around 1 TeV above which the spectral
                                                                                                                                  index rapidly changes from  -3.2 to  -4.1.99,100

                                                                                                                                      The sharp break seen by H.E.S.S., VERITAS, CALET, and DAMPE is one of
                                                                                                                                  the most pronounced features observed in the spectrum of all CRs. Regarding an
                                                                                                                                  interpretation, it was shown recently that the break in the all-electron spectrum
                                                                                                                                  can be interpreted in a stochastic model of sources,101 or produced by a single,
                                                                                                                                  nearby and fading source of electrons.98

                                                                                                                                  3.1.4. The anti-matter component : Unexpected behavior of positrons and
                                                                                                                                          antiprotons

                                                                                                                                  Over the last decade, many experimental efforts have been aimed at measuring with
                                                                                                                                  high precision CR fluxes of anti-matter, including positrons and antiprotons. Apart

                                                                                                                                                                                              1930022-15
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                      S. Gabici et al.
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                  from important information about CR propagation, these particles provide a test
                                                                                                                                  for primary cosmological antimatter and for nonstandard production.

                                                                                                                                      With this respect, the result that drove most excitation in the community was
                                                                                                                                  the measurements of the CR positron fraction, e+/(e+ + e-), by PAMELA102 (in
                                                                                                                                  fact, strengthening previous claim by HEAT103 and AMS-01104) and confirmed with
                                                                                                                                  impressive accuracy by AMS-02 from 0.5 GeV to 500 GeV.105

                                                                                                                                      Unlike standard predictions for secondary production in ISM, the positron frac-
                                                                                                                                  tion exhibits a pronounced rise beyond  8 GeV. In parallel with measurements
                                                                                                                                  of the electron spectrum, such an increase has been interpreted as the signal for
                                                                                                                                  the presence of a primary source of positrons. Other authors106-113 have however
                                                                                                                                  discussed scenarios where the positron flux is generated by the standard secondary
                                                                                                                                  production mechanism (see also below the discussion in Sec. 3.1.4).

                                                                                                                                      Energy losses by IC scattering on CMB photons and synchrotron emission in
                                                                                                                                  the local magnetic field place an upper limit on the age ( 105 yr) and distance
                                                                                                                                  (< 1 kpc) of the astrophysical sources of  100 GeV positrons. The observed excess
                                                                                                                                  of positrons was promptly interpreted as a long-waited signature of the presence of
                                                                                                                                  dark matter particles in the Milky Way halo.114 However, astrophysical sources as
                                                                                                                                  nearby and young pulsars96,115,116 or nearby SNRs, which may be able to produce
                                                                                                                                  and accelerate secondary positrons before they escape into the ISM,117-119 have
                                                                                                                                  been shown to be able to maintain the observed population of these particles.

                                                                                                                                      According to the latest AMS-02 data (e.g. Ref. 120), the positron fraction likely
                                                                                                                                  drops above a particle energy of  400-500 GeV. This can be explained only if
                                                                                                                                  the local source(s) of TeV electrons do not produce positrons in equal amount,
                                                                                                                                  disfavoring scenarios involving pulsars/pulsar winds as the main sources of high
                                                                                                                                  energy leptons.98

                                                                                                                                      Antiproton observations could be used to investigate the origin of primary
                                                                                                                                  positrons. If the rise in the positron fraction is due to dark matter, antiproton
                                                                                                                                  data provide important constraints on annihilation or decay model.68,121,122 At the
                                                                                                                                  same time, the SNR hypothesis leads as an unavoidable consequence to a secondary
                                                                                                                                  component with a hard energy spectrum, predicting a rise in the p¯/p ratio but also
                                                                                                                                  in the B/C, and the two cannot be accommodate consistently.

                                                                                                                                      The first accurate measurements of the antiproton spectrum have been per-
                                                                                                                                  formed by CAPRICE98123 and most notably by the BESS and BESS-Polar (1993-
                                                                                                                                  2008)124-126 detectors. More precise data have been collected by PAMELA127,128
                                                                                                                                  covering the range from 70 MeV to 200 GeV, and AMS-02129 extending this range
                                                                                                                                  to 300 GeV.

                                                                                                                                      A fundamental characteristic of the antiproton spectrum is the presence of the
                                                                                                                                  peak around 2 GeV which is due to the kinematic threshold at 7mp  6.5 GeV
                                                                                                                                  of the main secondary production reaction: p + pISM  3p + p¯. The p¯ spectrum
                                                                                                                                  falls sharply at low energy because the low energy particles must be produced with
                                                                                                                                  a large backward momentum in the center-of-mass reference frame, and so their
                                                                                                                                  progenitors are very high energy protons, whose intensity is relatively low. This

                                                                                                                                                                                              1930022-16
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                                                                                                             The origin of Galactic cosmic rays
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                  confirmed that, at least at low-energy, the secondary component is dominant in the
                                                                                                                                  CR p¯ flux.

                                                                                                                                      The p¯ production spectrum is given by a convolution of the primary spectrum of
                                                                                                                                  nucleons with the differential p¯ cross-sections,130,131 hence the predicted antiproton-
                                                                                                                                  to-proton ratio does not decrease with the same energy dependence as B/C.

                                                                                                                                      In fact, AMS-02 found that this ratio is almost flat at energies beyond  10 GeV.
                                                                                                                                  However, it has been claimed that this behavior might still be consistent with pure
                                                                                                                                  secondary production once the relevant uncertainties affecting these computations
                                                                                                                                  are taken into account.132,133

                                                                                                                                  3.1.5. A possible (nonorthodox ) interpretation of cosmic-ray positrons and
                                                                                                                                          antiprotons spectra

                                                                                                                                  In most of the studies on Galactic cosmic rays, the main observations used to
                                                                                                                                  identify source and propagation effects have been the study of secondary nuclei
                                                                                                                                  (such as lithium, beryllium and boron) as outlined in Sec. 2 in this review. The
                                                                                                                                  comparison of the spectra of different particle types, in particular p, e-, p and e+,
                                                                                                                                  that have different sources and different propagation properties, can also be used
                                                                                                                                  to develop an understanding of the mechanisms that form the spectra.

                                                                                                                                      Figure 2 shows some recent measurements of the energy spectra for the four
                                                                                                                                  particles types which show several intriguing features that have to be understood.

                                                                                                                                  Fig. 2. Spectra of p, e-, e+, (e- + e+) and p. The high energy data points for protons are from
                                                                                                                                  CREAM, the data points for (e- + e+) are from DAMPE and HESS. All other points are from
                                                                                                                                  AMS02. The lines superimposed to the e-, e+ and p data points are simple power law fits for
                                                                                                                                  E > 30 GeV. The line for the proton data is a broken power law fit. Figure adapted from Ref. 113.

                                                                                                                                                                                              1930022-17
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                      S. Gabici et al.
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                  One question that is obviously of central importance is the origin of the very dif-
                                                                                                                                  ferent shapes (and normalizations) of the p and e- spectra. Intimately related to
                                                                                                                                  this question is the problem of the origin of the softening observed in the (e+ + e-)
                                                                                                                                  spectrum at E 1 TeV.

                                                                                                                                      A second question that emerges naturally is why the spectra of e+ and p (above
                                                                                                                                  an energy of approximately 30 GeV) have very similar shape, with spectral indices
                                                                                                                                  that are equal within errors. This implies that the ratio of the two spectra is approx-
                                                                                                                                  imately constant with a value e+/p  2 that, within systematic uncertainties, is
                                                                                                                                  equal to the expected ratio for the standard mechanism of secondary production.

                                                                                                                                      The most commonly accepted interpretation for the difference between the p
                                                                                                                                  and e- spectrum (what can be considered as the "orthodoxy") is that the difference
                                                                                                                                  emerges as the consequence of the effects of the much higher rate of energy loss for
                                                                                                                                  e with respect to p (p), that softens an e- spectrum that at the source (when
                                                                                                                                  both particle types are ultrarelativistic) has the same shape as protons.

                                                                                                                                      The idea that the difference in spectral shape between e- and p is determined
                                                                                                                                  by propagation is simple and attractive, but there are some difficulties. The first
                                                                                                                                  one is that since the e- spectrum is much softer than the p spectrum already at an
                                                                                                                                  energy of few GeV, and the loss time for e± is of order Tloss  620 Myr/EGeV, this
                                                                                                                                  implies a very long residence time for CR in the Galaxy.

                                                                                                                                      The second one is that the softening feature in the e- and e+ spectra that
                                                                                                                                  should correspond to the transition between the regime where particle propagation
                                                                                                                                  is dominated by escape to the regime where energy loss is the dominant "sink"
                                                                                                                                  mechanism for the CR particles, that is now predicted in the GeV energy range, is
                                                                                                                                  not clearly visible, perhaps because it is hidden by the spectral distortions created
                                                                                                                                  by solar modulation. It should also be noted that the models have difficulties in
                                                                                                                                  describing the observed e- and p energy distributions assuming source spectra of
                                                                                                                                  the same shape.

                                                                                                                                      An additional important problem is associated to the interpretation of the
                                                                                                                                  prominent break in the (e- + e+) spectrum observed at 1 TeV. The origin of this
                                                                                                                                  structure remains controversial. An interesting possibility is that it is associated to
                                                                                                                                  the transition from escape to energy loss as the dominant effect in propagation. In
                                                                                                                                  this case however particles with a rigidity of order 1 TeV should have a residence
                                                                                                                                  time of order 0.5-1 Myr, two orders of magnitude shorter than the previous estimate.

                                                                                                                                      The properties of propagation in interstellar space for electrons and positrons
                                                                                                                                  (and for protons and antiprotons) are approximately equal. This has a very impor-
                                                                                                                                  tant implications for the interpretation of the spectra of antiparticles (e+ and p).
                                                                                                                                  If energy losses are the origin of the soft e- spectrum (and are therefore the dom-
                                                                                                                                  inant effect above an energy of few GeV), this implies that propagation effects
                                                                                                                                  should distort the positron and antiproton source spectra (that have similar shape
                                                                                                                                  for E 30 GeV) in very different ways.

                                                                                                                                      Why then do the positron and antiproton spectra have (in the energy range
                                                                                                                                  30-500 GeV) spectra of very similar shape? According to the "orthodoxy" this is
                                                                                                                                  simply a meaningless coincidence. The positron flux should be softened (relative to

                                                                                                                                                                                              1930022-18
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                                                                                                             The origin of Galactic cosmic rays
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                  antiprotons) by propagation effects (approximately) as much as the electron flux
                                                                                                                                  is softened relative to the protons. This then implies the existence of an additional
                                                                                                                                  hard source of positrons, that after the softening due to propagation results in a
                                                                                                                                  spectral shape equal to antiprotons. The absolute normalization of the new positron
                                                                                                                                  source is also such that the observed e+/p is of order unity even if the origins of
                                                                                                                                  the two particle types are totally distinct.

                                                                                                                                      The existence of these problems for the interpretation of the CR spectra, sug-
                                                                                                                                  gests the idea to explore alternative "heterodox" scenarios based on the following
                                                                                                                                  ideas112,113:

                                                                                                                                  (1) The difference in the observed spectra of e- and p is generated in (or in the
                                                                                                                                       vicinity of) the sources (presumably because of differences in the rate of energy
                                                                                                                                       loss), and not during propagation in interstellar space.

                                                                                                                                  (2) The residence time of CR in the Galaxy is short (much shorter than in the
                                                                                                                                       "orthodox" explanation) of order 0.5-1 Myr at 1 TeV. The propagation proper-
                                                                                                                                       ties of e and p(p) are therefore approximately equal for E 1 TeV.

                                                                                                                                  (3) The positron and antiproton fluxes are generated by the standard mechanism
                                                                                                                                       of secondary production, with no need for additional, nonstandard sources.

                                                                                                                                  (4) The break in the spectrum of the sum (e- + e+) can be interpreted as the effect
                                                                                                                                       of energy losses during propagation.

                                                                                                                                  (5) A comparison of the antiparticle spectra (e+ and p) with the spectra of protons
                                                                                                                                       and nuclei can be used to estimate the rigidity dependence of the CR Galactic
                                                                                                                                       residence time. This study results in a rather weak dependence, and therefore
                                                                                                                                       implies soft source spectra for protons and primary nuclei.

                                                                                                                                  (6) The interpretation of the spectra of secondary nuclei (such as lithium, beryllium
                                                                                                                                       and boron) becomes now problematic and very likely requires production in (or
                                                                                                                                       in the vicinity of) the sources.

                                                                                                                                      It should be stressed that there are significant difficulties in developing a consis-
                                                                                                                                  tent model that incorporate the ideas outlined above, but on the other hand there
                                                                                                                                  are also significant difficulties in developing a consistent picture using the "ortho-
                                                                                                                                  dox" point of view. The implications of the two different scenarios for CR astro-
                                                                                                                                  physics are profoundly different, because they result in very different properties for
                                                                                                                                  the sources and for the structure of the Galaxy, and therefore it seems important to
                                                                                                                                  study theoretically, and most importantly experimentally, these different scenarios.

                                                                                                                                      Several observations have the potential to shed light on these problems:

                                                                                                                                   (i) An extension of the measurement of the separate spectra of e- and e+.
                                                                                                                                  (ii) An extension of the energy range of the measurement of Beryllium isotopes.
                                                                                                                                  (iii) The study of the space dependence of the spectra of electrons and positrons

                                                                                                                                        in the Galaxy.
                                                                                                                                  (iv) A more accurate modeling of Solar Modulations.
                                                                                                                                  (v) The identification of the primary CR sources, and the determination of their

                                                                                                                                        properties.

                                                                                                                                                                                              1930022-19
                                                                                                                                  S. Gabici et al.

                                                                                                                                  (vi) The identification of new sources of positrons (and antiprotons) if indeed they
                                                                                                                                        exist.

Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                          The development of programs of observations that can address the questions is
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                  obviously very desirable, and has the potential to lead to the clarification of these

                                                                                                                                  very important problems. It should be stressed that models where the imprints

                                                                                                                                  of energy losses on the electron and positron fluxes predict softenings of the two

                                                                                                                                  spectra at approximately the same energy. Recently the AMS02 Collaboration134

                                                                                                                                  has released more data on the positron flux that extend the measurements to a

                                                                                                                                  maximum energy of 1 TeV. The high energy points show that the e+ spectrum

                                                                                                                                  has a marked softening that is fitted as an exponential suppression (e-E/Es with

                                                                                                                                  Es  =        +310    A  possible  interpretation  of  this  result  is  that  the  spectral

                                                                                                                                         810-180 GeV.

                                                                                                                                  suppression measures the maximum energy of a new hard source of positrons. On

                                                                                                                                  the other hand (see Ref. 135 for a more extended discussion) the spectrum could

                                                                                                                                  also be consistent with a "break" structure generated by energy loss effects. A
                                                                                                                                  comparison of the softening structures observed in the e+ and (e+ + e-) spectra is

                                                                                                                                  essential to discriminate between these possibilities.

                                                                                                                                  3.2. Deficit in large-scale anisotropies and unexpected small-scale
                                                                                                                                         anisotropies

                                                                                                                                  As discussed in Sec. 2, the diffusive paradigm for the transport of GCRs is based

                                                                                                                                  on two fundamental observations. First, the column depth of  10 g/cm2 inferred

                                                                                                                                  from secondary-to-primary ratios like Boron-to-Carbon requires CRs to traverse the

                                                                                                                                  gaseous disk a large number of times (see Sec. 2.2). Second, the arrival directions

                                                                                                                                  of CRs are remarkably isotropic, down to one part in 10,000 at tens of TeV which

                                                                                                                                  implies the need for efficient randomization of CR directions. If CRs were travel-
                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                  ing ballistically, the anisotropy would be roughly  1/ Nsrc; even with Nsrc = 10   6

                                                                                                                                  sources contributing this would fall short of the needed suppression.136 Resonant

                                                                                                                                  interactions with a turbulent magnetic field, however, can be the agent of ran-

                                                                                                                                  domization as it leads to efficient pitch-angle scattering. (The pitch angle is the

                                                                                                                                  angle between the CR momentum and the regular magnetic field.) In the limit of

                                                                                                                                  only small perturbations on top of a regular background magnetic field, the rate

                                                                                                                                  of scattering  can be computed in a perturbative approach called quasi-linear
                                                                                                                                  theory.137-140 The rate of pitch-angle scattering is smaller than the (relativistic)

                                                                                                                                  gyro frequency  by the ratio of energy densities of the turbulent and the regular
                                                                                                                                  magnetic field,   (B2/B02) .

                                                                                                                                      In quasi-linear theory, due to the low level of turbulence necessary for the valid-

                                                                                                                                  ity of the perturbative approach, diffusion is markedly anisotropic. The pitch-angle

                                                                                                                                  diffusion induces a relatively large parallel diffusion coefficient, D  c2/(3) while

                                                                                                                                  the perpendicular diffusion coefficient, for instance in isotropic turbulence, is smaller

                                                                                                                                  by (B2/B02)2, with c denoting the speed of light. For moderate levels of turbulence
                                                                                                                                  other processes like field-line random walk will likely dominate the contribution to

                                                                                                                                                                    1930022-20
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                                                                                                             The origin of Galactic cosmic rays
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                  perpendicular diffusion. Formally, isotropic diffusion (with a diffusion tensor pro-
                                                                                                                                  portional to the identity matrix) is outside the validity range of quasi-linear theory,
                                                                                                                                  but oftentimes the normalization and rigidity dependence of the diffusion coefficient
                                                                                                                                  are motivated from quasi-linear theory. Note that despite Galactic diffusion being
                                                                                                                                  locally anisotropic, it can be effectively isotropic on Galactic scales as the direction
                                                                                                                                  of the regular background magnetic field varies on Galactic scales.2

                                                                                                                                      Despite the efficient randomization, a residual anisotropy is retained if the dis-
                                                                                                                                  tribution of CR sources is inhomogeneous. In that case, there will be a gradient in
                                                                                                                                  the isotropic part of the density, thus inducing a dipole in the arrival directions of
                                                                                                                                  CRs. In isotropic diffusion, the dipole points up the CR gradient, i.e. toward the
                                                                                                                                  source(s). This has led to the suggestion to use CR anisotropies to search for nearby
                                                                                                                                  source(s).141-145 In isotropic diffusion, the dipole amplitude a is given by

                                                                                                                                                                            a = 3D |nCR| , (2)
                                                                                                                                                                                    c nCR

                                                                                                                                  where nCR denotes the CR density. In the limit of anisotropic diffusion, the observed
                                                                                                                                  dipole will be aligned with the (local) field direction and the amplitude will be
                                                                                                                                  reduced by the cosine of the angle between gradient and background field, that is
                                                                                                                                  nCR is replaced by b^ ·nCR with b^ = B0/|B0|. This projection limits the amount
                                                                                                                                  of information on sources encoded in the anisotropies. Another expected source of
                                                                                                                                  a dipole anisotropy is the Compton-Getting effect146,147 which is due to the relative
                                                                                                                                  motion between the observer and the frame in which the CR density is isotropic.

                                                                                                                                      Whereas in the simplest diffusion models with a scattering rate constant in
                                                                                                                                  pitch-angle, only the dipole is induced, more realistic turbulence models can induce
                                                                                                                                  also higher multipoles.148 Furthermore, the stochastic nature of the turbulent mag-
                                                                                                                                  netic field leads to some variance of dipole amplitudes and directions in different
                                                                                                                                  realizations of the turbulent magnetic field.149

                                                                                                                                      In Fig. 3, we show the phase and amplitude of the dipole anisotropy as recently
                                                                                                                                  measured by different experiments. Up to  10 TeV, the amplitude is growing to
                                                                                                                                   10-3, before decreasing and reaching a minimum of around 10-4 at a few hundred
                                                                                                                                  TeV. At even higher energies, it increases fast and reaches  10-1 at a few tens
                                                                                                                                  of PeV. The phase is relatively constant at  45 right ascension before rapidly
                                                                                                                                  changing to  270, the direction of the Galactic center, at a few tens of PeV. The
                                                                                                                                  energy of this transition is very close to the energy of the amplitude minimum.

                                                                                                                                      It has been noted a while ago9 that the level of anisotropy is at variance with
                                                                                                                                  what is expected in simple diffusion models. This problem has become known as
                                                                                                                                  the CR anisotropy problem.151 Data collected over the last 10-15 years have con-
                                                                                                                                  sistently confirmed the discrepancy.

                                                                                                                                      The "simple diffusion models" make a number of assumptions, including: (1)
                                                                                                                                  Diffusion is isotropic and the diffusion coefficient is largely homogeneous. (2) The
                                                                                                                                  rigidity dependence of the diffusion coefficient is as expected for a Kolmogorov or
                                                                                                                                  Kraichnan phenomenology of the turbulent magnetic field. (3) The distribution of
                                                                                                                                  sources is smooth and follows the Galactic distribution of SNRs or pulsars.

                                                                                                                                                                                              1930022-21
                                                                                                                                  S. Gabici et al.

                                                                                                                                                                                   model     MACRO    IceTop    Tibet-AS                                                                    Milagro  ARGO-YBJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Baksan                                                                      EAS-TOP
                                                                                                                                                                                    Super-K  IceCube  K-Grande

                                                                                                                                                                         90

                                                                                                                                                                         45

Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                                        phase 1 [degree]     0
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                                                         315

                                                                                                                                                                         270 Galactic Center
                                                                                                                                                                         225

                                                                                                                                                                         180

                                                                                                                                                                         135

                                                                                                                                                                         90

                                                                                                                                                    amplitude A1 [10-3]  10

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1/3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (energy)

                                                                                                                                                                         1

                                                                                                                                                                         0.1

                                                                                                                                                                              103            104      105                                                                              106           107

                                                                                                                                                                                                      energy [GeV]

                                                                                                                                  Fig. 3. Phase and amplitude of the (equatorial) dipole anisotropy from recent measurements.
                                                                                                                                  Figure adapted from Ref. 150.

                                                                                                                                      Various interpretations of and solutions to the anisotropy problem have been
                                                                                                                                  suggested. The fact that in anisotropic diffusion only the projection of the gradient
                                                                                                                                  onto the regular field direction matters can be used to reduce the tension by allow-
                                                                                                                                  ing for a misalignment between the gradient and the regular background field.149,152
                                                                                                                                  In addition, the stochasticity of the turbulent magnetic field can produce realiza-
                                                                                                                                  tions of the turbulent field that lead to lower dipole amplitudes.149 (In isotropic
                                                                                                                                  diffusion, this also weakens the directional association between gradient and dipole
                                                                                                                                  directions.) Furthermore, due to the discrete nature of CR sources in space and
                                                                                                                                  time, the density of CRs in the Galaxy is very sensitive to the exact distribution
                                                                                                                                  of young and/or nearby sources.153,154 This results in variations as a function of
                                                                                                                                  position and time of the observed dipole amplitudes and phases. Modeling of the
                                                                                                                                  nearby known sources155,156 and Monte Carlo simulations157,158 show variations
                                                                                                                                  of the amplitude and phase. However, in order to suppress the amplitude to the
                                                                                                                                  observed level of 10-4 at tens of TeV would require for the dipole from the Galactic
                                                                                                                                  center to cancel the dipole from a nearby source in the opposite direction.156 One
                                                                                                                                  of the earliest solutions to the anisotropy problem suggested159 was to limit the
                                                                                                                                  rigidity dependence of the diffusion coefficient (see also Ref. 157). Finally, simple
                                                                                                                                  diffusion models can be overestimating the size of the CR gradient and thus also
                                                                                                                                  the dipole anisotropy160: If diffusive escape was increased in the inner Galaxy (via
                                                                                                                                  higher levels of self-induced turbulence and thus larger perpendicular diffusion) this
                                                                                                                                  would also help with the gamma-ray gradient problem, see Sec. 3.3.3.

                                                                                                                                      The high statistics of observations performed over the last decade have not
                                                                                                                                  only improved the determination of the large scale anisotropies, but also led to a

                                                                                                                                                                                              1930022-22
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                                                                                                             The origin of Galactic cosmic rays
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                  serendipitous discovery at TeV-PeV energies: A number of localized hot-spots at
                                                                                                                                  the level of 10-4 were found by Tibet,161 Milagro,162 and ARGO-YBJ.163 IceCube
                                                                                                                                  extended the analysis of small-scale anisotropies to the southern hemisphere and
                                                                                                                                  presented their first angular power spectrum,164 proving that there is structure even
                                                                                                                                  on the smallest scales (as accessible with the given statistics). These pioneering
                                                                                                                                  observations have been confirmed and extended by HAWC and IceCube,165-168
                                                                                                                                  showing evidence for a smooth angular power spectrum with anisotropies present
                                                                                                                                  down to angular scales of 10.

                                                                                                                                      The appearance of small-scale anisotropies is most puzzling in the simple diffu-
                                                                                                                                  sion models that usually only predict dipole anisotropies (see, however, Ref. 148)
                                                                                                                                  and has led to a number of explanation. Historically the first were suggestions of
                                                                                                                                  unusual large-scale structures in the nearby Galactic magnetic fields, like magnetic
                                                                                                                                  lenses,169-171 that can lead to very narrow pitch-angle distributions. However, it
                                                                                                                                  was quickly pointed out172 that scattering would wash out such pitch-angle distribu-
                                                                                                                                  tions and hence such structures needed to be closer than a mean-free path for which
                                                                                                                                  there is no observational support. A more elaborate idea is nonuniform pitch-angle
                                                                                                                                  scattering that can also generate a sharp feature in the direction of the regular back-
                                                                                                                                  ground field.173 However, the presence of hot and cold spots in various directions
                                                                                                                                  implies that this is likely not the full explanation. The fact that one of the originally
                                                                                                                                  observed hot spots is very close to the heliotail direction has led to speculation over
                                                                                                                                  the role of the heliosphere in shaping the anisotropy.174-176 While some of the earlier
                                                                                                                                  models show some resemblance with the unusual large-scale structure models (see
                                                                                                                                  above), it has been shown in more sophisticated simulations177-179 that the helio-
                                                                                                                                  sphere does play a role in shaping the anisotropies even if it is not the sole cause.

                                                                                                                                      The arguably most elegant and economical explanation is to consider the role
                                                                                                                                  of the local, turbulent magnetic field in shaping the arrival direction of CRs.180
                                                                                                                                  Whereas the standard diffusion models only consider the ensemble averaged phase-
                                                                                                                                  space density, small-scale anisotropies point to correlations between pairs of tra-
                                                                                                                                  jectories of locally observed CRs. Those correlations must be present to a certain
                                                                                                                                  degree as particles arriving under small angles will have experienced similar turbu-
                                                                                                                                  lent magnetic field orientations. The success of this idea was proven in a number of
                                                                                                                                  numerical180-183 and analytical studies.181,184 See Fig. 4 for a comparison between
                                                                                                                                  analytical and numerical results with data. Note that there are also a number of
                                                                                                                                  more exotic possibilities, like strangelets186 and dark matter substructure.187

                                                                                                                                  3.3. Challenges from observations of far away cosmic rays

                                                                                                                                  Observation of the diffuse gamma-ray emission from the Galactic disk can be used
                                                                                                                                  to obtain stringent constraints on the propagation of CRs in the Galaxy, as well as
                                                                                                                                  on the distribution of CR sources. Over the past decade, data obtained by Fermi-
                                                                                                                                  LAT provided us with an unprecedented view of our Galaxy in GeV gamma rays.
                                                                                                                                  The emerging picture contains unexpected features, which are described in the
                                                                                                                                  remainder of this section.

                                                                                                                                                                                              1930022-23
S. Gabici et al.

                                                                                                                                          2 = 1, rL/Lc = 0.1, min/Lc = 0.01, max/Lc = 100, T = 100

Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                          1                                             model (p = 2/3)
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.    0.1                                             model (p = 1/2)
                                                                                                                                  10-2                                              model (p = 1/3)
                                                           relative power spectrum C /C1                                                                                            simulation (B0 n)
                                                                                                                                                                                    simulation (B0  n)

                                                                                                                                                                                    IceCube (rescaled)

                                                                                                                                                                                    HAWC (rescaled)

                                                                                                                                  10-3   HAWC noise level

                                                                                                                                  10-4   IceCube noise level

                                                                                                                                         Ahlers & Mertsch (2015)

                                                                                                                                         5                        10                15                  20

                                                                                                                                                                  multipole moment

Fig. 4. The angular power spectrum of CR anisotropies. The open circles and squares show the
measurements by IceCube185 and HAWC.165 The lines are the result of an analytical calcula-
tion with the parameter p determining the rate of decorrelation of trajectories. The diamonds
and triangles show the numerical computation of the angular power spectrum and differ in the
orientation of the CR gradient n and the regular background field B0. See Ref. 150 for details.

                                                                                                                                3.3.1. GeV excess

                                                                                                                                Over the latest decade, an increasing number of studies188-194 focused on the inner
                                                                                                                                Galaxy have repeatedly uncovered a statistically significant component in Fermi-
                                                                                                                                LAT data, whose spectral and morphological features were initially claimed to be
                                                                                                                                compatible with a dark matter pair annihilation signal. This component usually
                                                                                                                                emerges out of template-fitting analyses, in which the gamma-ray sky is decom-
                                                                                                                                posed into different components of given morphology (most importantly point
                                                                                                                                and extended sources, inverse Compton emission, hadronic emission, extra-Galactic
                                                                                                                                background), whose normalizations are fitted to the data in each energy bin. This
                                                                                                                                "GeV excess" is characterized by a bump-like spectral feature in the spectral energy
                                                                                                                                distribution which peaks around 3 GeV and shows an approximately spherical
                                                                                                                                morphology. This discovery triggered a stimulating debate in the gamma-ray com-
                                                                                                                                munity and several alternatives, i.e. astrophysical interpretations, were put forward.
                                                                                                                                References 195 and 196 re-analyzed this anomaly by implementing a steady-state
                                                                                                                                CR source term in the GC region that reflects the very high star-forming activity
                                                                                                                                in the massive molecular complex known as central molecular zone: The inclu-
                                                                                                                                sion of this term alters the IC template and absorbs most of the excess, signif-
                                                                                                                                icantly lowering the normalization of the GeV peak. The modeled IC template
                                                                                                                                is also altered by the magnetic field model used for the propagation models. For
                                                                                                                                example, a very recent work197 obtained IC templates more peaked toward the
                                                                                                                                inner Galaxy region at high energies, by using propagation models that account
                                                                                                                                for constraints of the Galactic magnetic field from nonthermal interstellar emis-
                                                                                                                                sion in radio and microwaves. Also importantly, several independent studies198,199

                                                                                                                                                                                            1930022-24
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                                                                                                             The origin of Galactic cosmic rays
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                  implementing different statistical techniques designed to identify the granularity
                                                                                                                                  in the photon count maps have recently showed evidence for a population of unre-
                                                                                                                                  solved point sources, possibly millisecond pulsars in the Galactic bulge. The recently
                                                                                                                                  developed SkyFACT200 tool, based on both template fitting and image reconstruc-
                                                                                                                                  tion techniques, has allowed for further improvement in the quality of the fits by
                                                                                                                                  implementing pixel-by-pixel variations of the Galactic diffuse emission templates: A
                                                                                                                                  recent investigation of the morphology of the GeV excess based on these techniques
                                                                                                                                  finds a correlation with the stellar distribution in the central boxy/peanut-shaped
                                                                                                                                  bulge/bar that characterize the inner regions of the Galaxy, and seems to provide
                                                                                                                                  more support to the millisecond pulsars hypothesis.201 The excess has also been
                                                                                                                                  comprehensively analyzed by the Fermi-LAT collaboration.194 The bottom lines of
                                                                                                                                  this decade-long debate, in our opinion, are the following: (1) The existence of an
                                                                                                                                  extended signal from the inner Galaxy peaking at few GeV is fairly well established;
                                                                                                                                  (2) The precise characterization of this anomaly seems to depend quite significantly
                                                                                                                                  on the assumptions regarding the spatial distribution of CR sources; (3) The inter-
                                                                                                                                  pretation in terms of unresolved point sources will be testable in the future by
                                                                                                                                  means of more sensitive radio facilities.202

                                                                                                                                  3.3.2. Progressive hardening in the hadronic gamma-ray emission

                                                                                                                                  The Fermi-LAT gamma-ray data offer the unique opportunity to probe the proper-
                                                                                                                                  ties of the diffuse and ubiquitous flux of cosmic particles in different regions of the
                                                                                                                                  Galaxy and learn useful insights on their propagation in a quite broad range of ener-
                                                                                                                                  gies. This is a very challenging task since it requires, once the point and extended
                                                                                                                                  sources are properly subtracted, to disentangle the different types of emission. A
                                                                                                                                  pioneering attempt to study the variation of the spectral index associated to the
                                                                                                                                  hadronic CR sea was presented in Ref. 203. A progressive hardening of the CR
                                                                                                                                  spectrum toward the GC is outlined in that paper, and a phenomenological inter-
                                                                                                                                  pretation in terms of a spatially varying scaling of the diffusion coefficient with
                                                                                                                                  rigidity is presented. The presence of the trend was then better characterized by
                                                                                                                                  means of different template-fitting techniques in Refs. 204-206, as illustrated in
                                                                                                                                  Fig. 5. An even more recent analysis based on the study of individual molecu-
                                                                                                                                  lar clouds is presented in Ref. 207, where the existence of such trend is actually
                                                                                                                                  questioned.

                                                                                                                                      The debate on the possible physical interpretations of this trend has then taken
                                                                                                                                  two different avenues.

                                                                                                                                      On the one hand, Ref. 208 invokes a preeminent role of advection with respect
                                                                                                                                  to diffusion in the inner Galaxy, in particular in the region of the Molecular Ring,
                                                                                                                                  to explain the trend. This effect may be due to a more significant contribution of
                                                                                                                                  streaming instability in that region: Indeed, the growth of Alfv´enic perturbations
                                                                                                                                  induced by the streaming of CRs themselves -- mostly taking place in the hot
                                                                                                                                  ionized phase of the ISM in presence of strong gradients in the CR flux -- is expected
                                                                                                                                  to be stronger in that region due to the abundance of potential CR sources.

                                                                                                                                                                                              1930022-25
S. Gabici et al.

                                                                                                                                  3.0

Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                      2.8
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                  2.6
                                         Spectral index
                                                                                                                                  2.4                             Fermi Collaboration (2016)

                                                                                                                                                                  Yang et al. (2016)

                                                                                                                                  2.2                             Pothast et al. (2018)

                                                                                                                                       0  5  10  15           20  25  30                      35

                                                                                                                                                     R [kpc]

Fig. 5. The hadronic CR spectral index inferred by Fermi-LAT data, according to three recent
analyses based on template-fitting techniques, see Refs. 204-206. The first point of the dataset
taken from Ref. 205 corresponds to the Central Molecular Zone only, which was cut out from
the innermost ring and associated to a dedicated gas column density map. Figure adapted from
Ref. 206.

                                                                                                                                    On the other hand, Ref. 209 devises an interpretation based on two pieces of
                                                                                                                                information: (1) The presence of a poloidal coherent component of the regular
                                                                                                                                Galactic magnetic field directed in the perpendicular direction with respect to the
                                                                                                                                Galactic plane in the inner Galaxy; (2) The harder slope of the parallel (with
                                                                                                                                respect to the regular field) diffusion coefficient with energy, hinted to by a low-
                                                                                                                                energy extrapolation of numerical simulations.210,211 Given these considerations,
                                                                                                                                the authors developed a CR transport model based on anisotropic CR transport.
                                                                                                                                The hardening, according to this interpretation, is caused by the progressive tran-
                                                                                                                                sition from perpendicular to parallel vertical escape from the Galactic plane: If
                                                                                                                                confirmed, such a scenario would imply that the hard CR spectrum in the inner
                                                                                                                                Galaxy extends all the way up to the multi-TeV domain, with relevant consequences
                                                                                                                                on the interpretation of TeV gamma-ray data and on neutrino astronomy, see e.g.
                                                                                                                                Refs. 212-214.

                                                                                                                                3.3.3. Gradient problem

                                                                                                                                How large is the gradient in the spatial distribution of CRs in the Galaxy? Early
                                                                                                                                observations by COS-B,215 confirmed more recently and with increasing accuracy
                                                                                                                                by EGRET216 and Fermi-LAT,217,218 point toward a rather weak dependence of the
                                                                                                                                CR proton density with respect to the Galactocentric radius in the outer Galaxy
                                                                                                                                (i.e. for R > 5 kpc). More precisely, the emissivity associated to the pion decay
                                                                                                                                component of the gamma-ray emission appears to decrease by only 20-40% when
                                                                                                                                moving from the local to the outer spiral arm of the Galaxy. This poses a serious
                                                                                                                                challenge to the standard theories of CR transport, where CR density is expected
                                                                                                                                to trace the distribution of sources and therefore to rapidly decline beyond the solar
                                                                                                                                circle. Such tension between observations and theoretical predictions goes typically
                                                                                                                                under the name of gradient problem.

                                                                                                                                                                                            1930022-26
                                                                                                                                                The origin of Galactic cosmic rays

                                                                                                                                  5

                                                                                                                                  4.5

Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                      4             E  100 MeV
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                  3.5                       zh = 20 kpc
                                                       Emissivity (10-26 photons s-1 sr-1 )
                                                                                                                                  3                         zh = 10 kpc

                                                                                                                                                            zh = 4 kpc

                                                                                                                                  2.5 zh = 2 kpc
                                                                                                                                                                                                             zh = 1 kpc

                                                                                                                                  2

                                                                                                                                                                              LAT data

                                                                                                                                  1.5

                                                                                                                                  1

                                                                                                                                  0.5

                                                                                                                                  00   2  4  6  8 10 12 14 16 18

                                                                                                                                             Galactocentric Radius (kpc)

Fig. 6. The emissivity associated to the pion decay component of the diffuse gamma-ray emission
as measured by Fermi-LAT and as predicted within standard CR propagation models. The different
theoretical predictions correspond to different sizes of the diffusive halo of the Galaxy, as detailed
in the legend. Only for very large values of this parameter the tension between model predictions
and data is attenuated. Figure taken from Ref. 217.

                                                                                                                                    The first attempts at a solution to the gradient problem did not involve any
                                                                                                                                modification of the standard description of CR propagation. As an example, as
                                                                                                                                investigated in Ref. 219, one could reduce the steepness of the CR proton density by
                                                                                                                                simply assuming a larger size for the diffusive halo of the Galaxy (10 kpc or more).
                                                                                                                                This is shown in Fig. 6. However, matching the flatness of the density profile inferred
                                                                                                                                from the gamma-ray observations appears to be rather difficult and, at some point,
                                                                                                                                a very large halo size starts to be in tension with 10Be/Be and synchrotron data.
                                                                                                                                An alternative solution would be to adopt a flatter distribution of sources, but
                                                                                                                                this seems to be in contrast with SNR catalogs,220 pulsar catalogs,221 and with
                                                                                                                                the distribution of OB stars.222 Another possibility, put forward in Ref. 223, lies
                                                                                                                                in assuming a sharp rise of the factor XCO adopted to convert the intensity of the
                                                                                                                                carbon monoxide line emission into the molecular hydrogen column density. Under
                                                                                                                                this hypothesis, the flatness of the CR density in the outer Galaxy would just be the
                                                                                                                                result of an erroneous determination of the molecular component of the interstellar
                                                                                                                                hydrogen density in that region. However, the analysis performed by Fermi-LAT
                                                                                                                                in Ref. 217 showed that the gradient problem is still present even if one considers
                                                                                                                                only the diffuse emission resulting from collisions against the atomic component of
                                                                                                                                the interstellar hydrogen.

                                                                                                                                    A different approach in solving the gradient problem, which implies a modifi-
                                                                                                                                cation of the standard description of CR diffusion, has been pursued in Ref. 160.
                                                                                                                                Within this model, the diffusion coefficient perpendicular to the Galactic magnetic
                                                                                                                                field is characterized by a spatial-dependent normalization, strongly correlated with
                                                                                                                                the CR source distribution. One possible reason for this is that perpendicular diffu-
                                                                                                                                sion is expected to be stronger in regions of high turbulence, where sources are more

                                                                                                                                                                                            1930022-27
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                      S. Gabici et al.
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                  abundant. CRs thus escape more easily from these active regions and, as a result,
                                                                                                                                  the CR density profile is flattened. It is important to point out that such model
                                                                                                                                  could help with the large scale anisotropy problem, but not solve it as a smaller
                                                                                                                                  gradient does not necessarily lead to the very weak energy dependence between
                                                                                                                                  10 TeV and 100 TeV (see Sec. 3.2).

                                                                                                                                  3.3.4. Fermi bubbles

                                                                                                                                  One of the most unexpected findings of the Fermi-LAT mission was the discovery of
                                                                                                                                  the Fermi bubbles.224-226 These huge, bi-lobular structures in gamma rays are likely
                                                                                                                                  emanating from the Galactic center and extend for 10 kpc above and below. They
                                                                                                                                  exhibit sharp borders and a constant surface brightness which is most peculiar for
                                                                                                                                  such a large and diffuse structure. Equivalently, their spectrum and intensity do not
                                                                                                                                  vary within the bubbles. Between  1 GeV and  100 GeV, they have a E-2 power
                                                                                                                                  law spectrum, thus harder than the Galactic diffuse emission. In principle, their
                                                                                                                                  gamma-ray emission can be of hadronic or leptonic nature, but the likely association
                                                                                                                                  with the microwave haze227,228 is more easily explained in leptonic scenarios. It is
                                                                                                                                  interesting to note that at high energy these structures are visible even without
                                                                                                                                  interstellar model subtraction. Also more recent synchrotron polarization maps229
                                                                                                                                  show interesting features that may be correlated to the gamma-ray bubbles.

                                                                                                                                      The directional association with the Galactic center makes two sources for their
                                                                                                                                  energy very natural: a relativistic outflow, that is a jet, from past activity of the
                                                                                                                                  supermassive black hole (AGN scenario, e.g. Refs. 230 and 231); or a period of star
                                                                                                                                  burst activity (or steady star formation) resulting in combined winds from explo-
                                                                                                                                  sions of massive stars (star burst/star formation scenario) (e.g. Refs. 232 and 233).

                                                                                                                                      Broadly speaking, leptonic scenarios require fast transport of CRs if the accel-
                                                                                                                                  eration sites are in or close to the disk due to the radiative losses on Galactic
                                                                                                                                  radiation fields and the CMB. An alternative is the in situ acceleration of electrons
                                                                                                                                  by stochastic acceleration in the bubble volume (e.g. Ref. 234). Hadronic scenarios
                                                                                                                                  do not suffer such radiative losses and can thus maintain high-energy particles even
                                                                                                                                  if operating on much longer timescales, but particle confinement on Gyr timescales
                                                                                                                                  can become challenging. It is remarkable to see that CRs (hadrons and/or lep-
                                                                                                                                  tons) can be transported or accelerated up to a distance from the Galactic plane of
                                                                                                                                   10 kpc, which exceeds that commonly adopted for the Galactic halo ( few kpc).

                                                                                                                                  3.3.5. CR spectra in the local interstellar medium

                                                                                                                                  When comparing gamma-ray diffuse emission observations with CR propagation
                                                                                                                                  models, models are usually based on direct CR measurements, which are assumed
                                                                                                                                  to be representative of CR properties throughout the local ISM.

                                                                                                                                      This assumption found support in the results of several early analyses aimed at
                                                                                                                                  inferring the local HI gamma-ray emissivity from Fermi-LAT data.15,235,236 These
                                                                                                                                  investigations focused on intermediate latitudes (10 < |b| < 20), where the

                                                                                                                                                                                              1930022-28
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                                                                                                             The origin of Galactic cosmic rays
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                  dominant contribution to gamma-ray emission is supposed to come from interstel-
                                                                                                                                  lar emission within  1 kpc from the Sun and where the uncertainties associated
                                                                                                                                  with CR propagation and gas distribution are expected to be minimized. Even with
                                                                                                                                  this considered, however, degeneracies in the gas distribution and interstellar radi-
                                                                                                                                  ation field, together with the contamination among the different components of the
                                                                                                                                  gamma-ray sky, can make the comparison between data and models challenging.
                                                                                                                                  Moreover, these first results were influenced by relatively large uncertainties both
                                                                                                                                  in gamma-ray data and in the directly measured CR spectra.

                                                                                                                                      A more recent study, illustrated in Ref. 237, has led to a very accurate deter-
                                                                                                                                  mination of the local HI emissivity, using reprocessed Fermi-LAT data and more
                                                                                                                                  extended observations, based on the extensive analysis described in Ref. 238. This
                                                                                                                                  emissivity can be used to infer a local CR proton spectrum which can be compared
                                                                                                                                  with direct CR measurements, as discussed in Refs. 91, 237, 239 and 240. As shown
                                                                                                                                  in Ref. 91, the CR proton spectrum derived from the emissivity found in Ref. 237
                                                                                                                                  is a factor of 1.4 ± 0.5 larger than the very precise AMS-02 measurements at ener-
                                                                                                                                  gies above 1 GeV,56 even after including 10% uncertainties in the cross-sections. It
                                                                                                                                  is worthwhile to recall that earlier analyses, such as those described in Refs. 237
                                                                                                                                  and 240, derived a similar proton spectrum, but no claim could be made due to the
                                                                                                                                  larger uncertainties of PAMELA data with respect to AMS-02 data used in Ref. 91.

                                                                                                                                      The use of gamma-ray observations to investigate CR spectra in the local
                                                                                                                                  ISM is not limited to protons, but can be extended to electrons and positrons.
                                                                                                                                  This has been shown in Ref. 91, where, for the first time, the bremsstrahlung
                                                                                                                                  component of the local HI gamma-ray emissivity associated to CR electrons and
                                                                                                                                  positrons has been constrained by using observations of the synchrotron emission
                                                                                                                                  and CR direct measurements, by Voyager 1241 and AMS-0287,88 in the low- and
                                                                                                                                  high-energy regime, respectively. The combined effect of the constraints coming
                                                                                                                                  from these different observables is that a local all-electron CR spectrum can be
                                                                                                                                  derived without the need of any assumption on solar modulation. Results obtained
                                                                                                                                  in this way show that both gamma-ray data and radio/microwave data prefer
                                                                                                                                  pure diffusion/convection models over the usual reacceleration models, as previ-
                                                                                                                                  ously found in Ref. 89 using radio/microwave data only, and confirmed in Refs. 242
                                                                                                                                  and 243.

                                                                                                                                      In summary, present precise measurements of the local HI emissivity and very
                                                                                                                                  accurate CR direct measurement have started challenging also the assumption that
                                                                                                                                  CRs at Earth are representative of CRs in the local  1 kpc region. Moreover,
                                                                                                                                  both synchrotron (radio and microwave) and gamma-ray data challenge standard
                                                                                                                                  reacceleration models, in favor of diffusion models with no, or low, reacceleration.

                                                                                                                                  4. Long Standing Open Problems in the Standard Paradigm

                                                                                                                                  The previous sections have been devoted to a description of recent observational
                                                                                                                                  results which revealed unexpected features in the CR spectra, anisotropies, and spa-
                                                                                                                                  tial distribution. These findings questioned several of the aspects of the standard

                                                                                                                                                                                              1930022-29
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                      S. Gabici et al.
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                  paradigm for the origin of CRs. Besides these new issues, several well-known prob-
                                                                                                                                  lems of the paradigm persist since many years. In the following, we list those which
                                                                                                                                  are, in our view, the most critical.

                                                                                                                                  4.1. The knee of the cosmic-ray spectrum

                                                                                                                                  The so-called "knee" is the most pronounced feature in the all-particle spectrum
                                                                                                                                  of hadronic CRs, and consists of a steepening of the spectrum to E-3 at a particle
                                                                                                                                  energy of few PeV.244 For particle energies well below the knee the CR composition
                                                                                                                                  is largely dominated by protons, while for larger energies the presence of heavier
                                                                                                                                  elements becomes important. According to the usual consensus view, the spectral
                                                                                                                                  steepening observed above the knee corresponds to a reduced efficiency of GCR
                                                                                                                                  sources in accelerating particles up to such energies.23,245 Alternative models are
                                                                                                                                  based on a reduced ability of the Galactic magnetic field to confine particles above
                                                                                                                                  the knee.246

                                                                                                                                      More specifically, in the usual consensus view the energy of the knee (few PeV)
                                                                                                                                  is associated to the maximum energy that protons can attain at Galactic acceler-
                                                                                                                                  ators. Heavier elements, being much less abundant than hydrogen in the ISM, are
                                                                                                                                  subdominant in the CR spectrum below the knee. However, since shocks accelerate
                                                                                                                                  particles according to their rigidity (and not energy), the contribution of heavy
                                                                                                                                  elements is expected to increase significantly above the knee, because the maximum
                                                                                                                                  energy that these elements can reach in a given accelerator is larger than that of
                                                                                                                                  hydrogen. Within this scenario, it has been shown that the sum of the contribu-
                                                                                                                                  tions to the total CR spectrum from all the nuclear species reproduces well the E-3
                                                                                                                                  spectrum observed above the knee.245

                                                                                                                                      Quantitatively, the Hillas criterion can be invoked to estimate the maximum
                                                                                                                                  energy of a particle of atomic number Z at a SNR shock of size Rsh moving at a
                                                                                                                                  velocity ushs, giving151:

                                                                                                                                                         Emax  Z Rsh ush Bup TeV, (3)
                                                                                                                                                                    3 pc 1000 km/s µG

                                                                                                                                  where Bup is the value of the magnetic field upstream of the shock. The rate at
                                                                                                                                  which SNRs convert energy into CRs peaks at the transition between the ejecta
                                                                                                                                  dominated and the Sedov phase, when the shock radius is of the order of the parsec
                                                                                                                                  or so, and the shock speed is several thousands of km/s. This implies that the
                                                                                                                                  predicted maximum energy of protons falls short of the knee247 unless the magnetic
                                                                                                                                  field at the shock is dramatically amplified with respect to its interstellar value.28

                                                                                                                                      Magnetic fields much stronger than interstellar ones are indeed observed in
                                                                                                                                  young SNRs,248 and this could be a manifestation of a field amplification mechanism
                                                                                                                                  based on nonresonant CR streaming instability proposed by Bell.24 However, even if
                                                                                                                                  this mechanism operates, it is not easy to amplify the field enough to have protons
                                                                                                                                  accelerated up to the knee at the time of the transition to the Sedov phase.249
                                                                                                                                  According to Bell,28 the amplification is driven by the current generated by the

                                                                                                                                                                                              1930022-30
                                                                                                                                                                                                The origin of Galactic cosmic rays

                                                                                                                                  CRs that, once accelerated up to Emax, escape the SNR. As a result, a fraction

                                                                                                                                  of the shock ram pressure         u2    is  converted   into  magnetic  field  energy  density.

                                                                                                                                                                      sh

                                                                                                                                  For a given CR acceleration efficiency at the shock (which must be about 10% if

Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                      SNRs are the sources of CRs), the effectiveness of the amplification mechanism
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                  will depend on the spectral slope of the accelerated particles (if the spectrum is

                                                                                                                                  steeper there will be less CRs at Emax and therefore a weaker current and a less
                                                                                                                                  effective amplification).250-253 Reaching energies of the knee is problematic because,
                                                                                                                                  if one wants SNRs to accelerate CRs with a spectrum somewhat steeper than E-2

                                                                                                                                  (as required by observations, see Sec. 2.3), then the current of escaping CRs is

                                                                                                                                  not strong enough to provide enough amplification to allow protons to reach PeV

                                                                                                                                  energies. On the other hand, if one wants SNRs to accelerate protons up to the

                                                                                                                                  knee, the required magnetic field amplification requires one to assume a spectrum
                                                                                                                                  of accelerated particles equal or harder than E-2.

                                                                                                                                      From an observational point of view, conclusive evidence for the effective accel-

                                                                                                                                  eration of PeV protons at SNR shocks would be provided by the detection of

                                                                                                                                  neutrinos or gamma rays from such objects (or form their immediate proximity),

                                                                                                                                  with a spectrum extending unattenuated to the multi-TeV ( 10 TeV) domain.254

                                                                                                                                  However, the low statistics of spectra in the multi-TeV domain, together with the

                                                                                                                                  expected very small number of currently active SNR PeVatrons (at most a few in

                                                                                                                                  the entire Galaxy) make these observations challenging even for the most sensitive

                                                                                                                                  instruments.255 Remarkably, the HESS Collaboration claimed the discovery of a

                                                                                                                                  "PeVatron" located in the vicinity (inner 10 pc) of the Galactic center, and most

                                                                                                                                  likely linked to the central supermassive black hole.256 This first detection is of great

                                                                                                                                  impact because it demonstrates that PeVatrons other than (the hypothetical) SNRs

                                                                                                                                  do exist in the Galaxy.

                                                                                                                                      Thus, whether or not SNRs are capable of accelerating particles up to rigidities

                                                                                                                                  of few PV remains, to date, an open issue.

                                                                                                                                  4.2. The transition from Galactic to extragalactic Cosmic rays

                                                                                                                                  The "ankle" is a hardening in the CR spectrum observed at a particle energy equal

                                                                                                                                  to  3 × 1018 eV. This hardening is believed to result from the emergence of the
                                                                                                                                  EG component of CRs above the Galactic one.257 As seen above, the knee in the

                                                                                                                                  CR spectrum is commonly considered to represent the maximum energy of protons

                                                                                                                                  accelerated at Galactic sources, with heavier nuclei shaping the CR spectrum at

                                                                                                                                  larger energies. Among heavy elements, the most abundant in the ISM is iron,

                                                                                                                                  characterized by an atomic number ZFe = 26. In the most standard scenarios for

                                                                                                                                  particle acceleration, nuclei are accelerated up to the same rigidity, and therefore

                                                                                                                                  the contribution to the total CR spectrum from Galactic sources should extend

                                                                                                                                  up  to  an  energy  of  E Fe      ZFeEmHax    1017 eV,  where  EH       is  the  energy  of  the

                                                                                                                                                             max                                    max

                                                                                                                                  knee. This energy is about 30 times smaller than the energy of the ankle, posing

                                                                                                                                  a problem to the standard scenario for the transition from GCRs to extragalactic

                                                                                                                                  CRs (EGCRs).

                                                                                                                                                                              1930022-31
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                      S. Gabici et al.
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                      A possible solution would be to assume that the transition happens much earlier
                                                                                                                                  than the ankle, at an energy of  1017 eV. In fact, another (less pronounced) feature
                                                                                                                                  is observed at this energy in the CR spectrum. The feature is known as the second
                                                                                                                                  knee and appears as a slight steepening in the all particle spectrum.258 However,
                                                                                                                                  a transition at the second knee would require an unnatural amount of fine tuning,
                                                                                                                                  since the EG contribution should appear sharply exactly where the Galactic one
                                                                                                                                  disappears (while in the case of a hardening in the spectrum such fine tuning is
                                                                                                                                  not required).257 Moreover, in this scenario one would also need to find another
                                                                                                                                  explanation for the ankle. Alternatively, one could assume the existence of a third
                                                                                                                                  CR population that would fill the gap between the SNR component and the EG
                                                                                                                                  one,245 or that a subset of the SNR population, rather than a new source class, fills
                                                                                                                                  the gap.259 For a critical analysis of these three-components scenarios, the reader
                                                                                                                                  is referred to Ref. 257.

                                                                                                                                      Finally, another possible solution to the problem is to question the entire SNR
                                                                                                                                  paradigm and suppose that the contribution from sources other than SNRs domi-
                                                                                                                                  nates the CR spectrum all the way up to the ankle. According to the most popular
                                                                                                                                  alternative view, superbubbles rather than isolated SNRs may explain the entire
                                                                                                                                  spectrum of GCRs up to the ankle.257,260-262 This scenario, however, surprisingly
                                                                                                                                  received much less attention than the SNR paradigm, and thus needs to be further
                                                                                                                                  investigated.

                                                                                                                                  4.2.1. EGCR: How far down in energy?

                                                                                                                                  In a (definitely nonorthodox) paper in 1972 Brecher and Burbidge263 proposed that
                                                                                                                                  all (hadronic) CRb are EG and fill the universe at the same level as in the Galaxy.
                                                                                                                                  The classical disproof of this conjecture was that the hadronic pion-decay gamma-
                                                                                                                                  ray background on intergalactic gas would exceed the observations. Also the density
                                                                                                                                  of CR in the Galaxy seems vary with position,264 which would also argue against
                                                                                                                                  this idea. However, now 40 years later we have far better data and we ought to
                                                                                                                                  check up on the current situation. The intergalactic gas density is about 10-7 H
                                                                                                                                  atoms cm-3 from Big-Bang nucleosynthesis theory, and using measured Galac-
                                                                                                                                  tic gamma-ray emissivities237,240 e.g. at 1 GeV: 2 × 10-24 MeV2 sr-1 s-1 MeV-1
                                                                                                                                  H-atom-1, we find (multiplying by the Hubble distance  1028 cm) a diffuse back-
                                                                                                                                  ground 2 × 10-3 MeV2 cm-2 sr-1 s-1 MeV-1 compared to the observed intergalactic
                                                                                                                                  gamma-ray background IGRB (defined as the background excluding resolved EG
                                                                                                                                  sources) 6 × 10-4 MeV2 cm-2 sr-1 s-1 MeV-1,265 so the resulting background is
                                                                                                                                  still too high but strangely close. Of course the IGRB is thought to be dominated
                                                                                                                                  by AGN and any residual diffuse flux much lower, so the excess is certainly robust
                                                                                                                                  and the universal CR theory is still excluded.

                                                                                                                                      Regarding the GCR variations, the derivation of the GCR density is fraught
                                                                                                                                  with uncertainty due to the difficulty of getting reliable densities of atomic and

                                                                                                                                  bEnergy losses on the CMB exclude this for the leptonic component.

                                                                                                                                                                                              1930022-32
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                                                                                                             The origin of Galactic cosmic rays
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                  molecular hydrogen, including the so-called dark gas not traced by CO. So this is
                                                                                                                                  not a watertight argument against universal CR. More solid is the relatively low
                                                                                                                                  interstellar flux from the LMC266 and M31,267 less than expected if CR fill the
                                                                                                                                  universe.

                                                                                                                                      Although there is evidence for hadronic production in SNR, this is not yet
                                                                                                                                  completely proved, as discussed in Sec. 2.5.

                                                                                                                                      While it is unlikely that the universe is uniformly filled with CR, an EG origin
                                                                                                                                  above say 1 TeV is certainly not excluded by any data. The IGRB has not been
                                                                                                                                  measured at these energies and there does not seem much prospect of doing so at
                                                                                                                                  present.

                                                                                                                                      Most EGCR models e.g. Refs. 268 and 269 invoke a quite hard CR spectrum
                                                                                                                                  e.g. E-2 to avoid having a substantial EG component at lower energies, and EGCR
                                                                                                                                  are assumed to cut in above 1015 eV. Instead a E-2.5 law would give a few per-
                                                                                                                                  cent EGCR/GCR at 1 TeV and be consistent with available constraints. Of course
                                                                                                                                  this would have to be investigated in the context of composition studies, secondary
                                                                                                                                  production, etc. But it does appear that restricting EGCR to above 1015 eV is a pre-
                                                                                                                                  conceived notion, again perhaps a truth universally accepted but not necessarily so.

                                                                                                                                      The pair cascades induced by UHECR on the cosmological radiation fields are
                                                                                                                                  a current hot topic270,271 because of their contribution to the EG gamma-ray back-
                                                                                                                                  ground, and it is interesting that apart from constraining models, there might be
                                                                                                                                  the prospect of eventually actually detecting this gamma-ray background among
                                                                                                                                  the other components, as first discussed by Ref. 272.

                                                                                                                                  4.3. Chemical composition of cosmic rays

                                                                                                                                  As seen in Sec. 2.3, the chemical composition of CRs exhibits significant differences
                                                                                                                                  when compared to the solar one. Besides the large overabundance of light (LiBeB)
                                                                                                                                  and sub-iron elements in CRs, explained as the result of spallation, several less strik-
                                                                                                                                  ing but still very significant differences exist between the composition of CRs and
                                                                                                                                  that of the (primordial) solar system. Most notably, CRs exhibit an overabundance
                                                                                                                                  of metals (nuclei with Z > 2) with respect of H and He, and of refractory elements
                                                                                                                                  over volatiles. While the former difference remains unexplained, the latter is most
                                                                                                                                  likely connected to the role played by dust grains during the acceleration process.36

                                                                                                                                      More recently, composition measurements by ACE at energies of hundreds of
                                                                                                                                  MeV/n273 and TIGER at GeV/n274 showed that the volatile abundance enhance-
                                                                                                                                  ment clearly depends on mass, while for the refractories this correlation appears
                                                                                                                                  to be less distinct. However, the ordering of these elements with atomic mass is
                                                                                                                                  greatly improved (with similar slopes) by comparing CR source abundances with
                                                                                                                                  a mixture of  80% of material with primordial solar composition and  20% of
                                                                                                                                  material enriched by stellar outflows and/or ejecta.275

                                                                                                                                      Such a mixed ISM can be found inside superbubbles which are inflated by the
                                                                                                                                  localized and episodic explosions of many supernovae in a stellar cluster.261 More-
                                                                                                                                  over, the acceleration of CRs in metal enriched superbubbles, rather than in the

                                                                                                                                                                                              1930022-33
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                      S. Gabici et al.
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                  typical ISM, might also provide an explanation for the abundances of Be and B
                                                                                                                                  (products of CR spallogenic nucleosynthesis) observed in old halo stars of different
                                                                                                                                  metallicity.262,276 Unexpectedly, beryllium and boron abundances in metal poor
                                                                                                                                  halo stars are found to increase linearly with metallicity (expressed in terms of the
                                                                                                                                  abundance ratios [Fe/H] or [O/H]), rather than quadratically, as one would expect
                                                                                                                                  from a scenario where CRs are accelerated out of a standard (i.e. nonenriched)
                                                                                                                                  ISM.262,276

                                                                                                                                      Some difficulties also persist in explaining the abundances of some CR isotopes,
                                                                                                                                  most notably the overabundance of roughly a factor of 5 of 22Ne with respect
                                                                                                                                  to expectations suggests that a significant fraction of CRs is accelerated out of
                                                                                                                                  Wolf-Rayet wind material, enriched in helium burning products.34 Whether this
                                                                                                                                  condition can be satisfied in superbubbles it is a matter of current debate.261,277
                                                                                                                                  The same holds for the anomalous (enhanced) isotopic ratio 58Fe/56Fe.278

                                                                                                                                      Finally, a possible connection between CR acceleration and stellar clusters (OB
                                                                                                                                  associations) comes also from the recent detection of 60Fe in CRs. 60Fe is a -
                                                                                                                                  unstable primary CR with half-life  2.6 Myr that is primarily synthesized in core-
                                                                                                                                  collapse SNe. Its presence in the cosmic radiation permits to set an upper limit of a
                                                                                                                                  few million years on the time between nucleosynthesis of these nuclei and detection
                                                                                                                                  at Earth, as it is the case if they were injected by a local (distance kpc) association
                                                                                                                                  of OB stars.279 Supported by the discovery of products of radioactive 60Fe in deep-
                                                                                                                                  sea sediments, this is evidence for a nearby and recent supernova, invalidating many
                                                                                                                                  of the current models of GCR.

                                                                                                                                  5. Conclusions

                                                                                                                                  Much of CR research in the past century has been devoted to answering a set of
                                                                                                                                  classical questions:

                                                                                                                                  (1) Which classes of sources contribute to the CR flux in different energy ranges?
                                                                                                                                       How many types of sources provide a significant contribution to the overall CR
                                                                                                                                       flux?

                                                                                                                                  (2) Are CR nuclei and electrons accelerated by the same sources?
                                                                                                                                  (3) Which sources are capable of reaching the highest particle energies and how?
                                                                                                                                  (4) Which are the relevant processes responsible for CR confinement in the Galaxy?
                                                                                                                                  (5) Where is the transition between Galactic and EGCRs and how can we explain

                                                                                                                                       the well-known features such as knee, second knee, ankle?
                                                                                                                                  (6) What is the origin of the difference between the chemical composition of CRs

                                                                                                                                       and the solar one?

                                                                                                                                      Many decades of direct and indirect observations of GCRs, together with exten-
                                                                                                                                  sive theoretical investigations, have led to the development of a broadly accepted
                                                                                                                                  scenario for CR origin, which we have referred to before as the "orthodoxy" (see
                                                                                                                                  Sec. 2). Within this framework, plausible (though not conclusive) answers to most
                                                                                                                                  of the above questions can be obtained.

                                                                                                                                                                                              1930022-34
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                                                                                                             The origin of Galactic cosmic rays
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                      Thanks to impressive progress on the experimental side over the past  15-
                                                                                                                                  20 years, both in direct (Secs. 3.1 and 3.2) and indirect observations (Secs. 2.4
                                                                                                                                  and 3.3), an enormous amount of data of unprecedented quality has allowed study-
                                                                                                                                  ing GCRs in greater detail. Overall, a much more complicated picture than pre-
                                                                                                                                  viously thought has emerged: As discussed in Sec. 3, new observations revealed a
                                                                                                                                  great number of anomalies and unexpected behaviors thus producing a whole list
                                                                                                                                  of new puzzles:

                                                                                                                                   (1) What is the origin of the hardening observed in the spectra of CR nuclei at a
                                                                                                                                        rigidity of  300 GV? (Sec. 3.1.1)

                                                                                                                                   (2) Why is the slope of the spectrum of CR proton and helium different?
                                                                                                                                        (Sec. 3.1.1)

                                                                                                                                   (3) What is the origin of the prominent break observed at a particle energy of
                                                                                                                                         1 TeV in the electron spectrum? (Sec. 3.1.3)

                                                                                                                                   (4) Why do the proton, positron, and antiproton spectra have roughly the same
                                                                                                                                        slope at particle energies larger than  10 GeV? (Sec. 3.1.4)

                                                                                                                                   (5) What is the origin of the rise in the positron fraction at particle energies above
                                                                                                                                         10 GeV? (Sec. 3.1.4)

                                                                                                                                   (6) What is the origin of small scale anisotropies? (Sec. 3.2)
                                                                                                                                   (7) Why is the CR flux very close to isotropy up to very large particle energies?

                                                                                                                                        Why is the phase of the anisotropy pointing away from the Galactic center for
                                                                                                                                        particle energies below  100 TeV? (Sec. 3.2)
                                                                                                                                   (8) Can we explain the spatial variations of the CR intensity in the Galaxy? In
                                                                                                                                        other words: why is the spatial gradient of CRs so small? Why is the CR
                                                                                                                                        spectrum hardening toward the center of the Galaxy? (Secs. 3.3.3 and 3.3.2)
                                                                                                                                   (9) What is the origin of the GeV excess detected from a region roughly coincident
                                                                                                                                        with the Galactic bulge? (Sec. 3.3.1)
                                                                                                                                  (10) What is the origin of the Fermi bubbles? (Sec. 3.3.4)
                                                                                                                                  (11) Given the quite complicated picture emerging from data, how can we possibly
                                                                                                                                        use CRs to search for new physics? Is there a really "clean" channel? (For a
                                                                                                                                        more detailed discussion on this point, see for instance the recent review.280)

                                                                                                                                      These new questions are much more detailed that the "classical" questions,
                                                                                                                                  reflecting of course the dramatic improvement in the quality of data that became
                                                                                                                                  available in recent times. Also, the amount of detail we can now observe challenges
                                                                                                                                  the currently accepted paradigm, which indeed did not predict any of the features
                                                                                                                                  found in the latest data. It is possibly for this reason that several alternative ideas
                                                                                                                                  to the SNR paradigm, proposed years ago to explain the origin of CRs, have been
                                                                                                                                  recently revived. The list includes the acceleration of particles at the Galactic cen-
                                                                                                                                  ter (see Ref. 12 for an early reference, Ref. 256 for a recent one), at stellar winds
                                                                                                                                  (see Ref. 281 for an early reference, Ref. 282 for a recent one), in superbubbles
                                                                                                                                  (see Refs. 283 and 284 for early references, Refs. 260-262 for recent ones), or the
                                                                                                                                  explanation of at least part of the CR spectrum with a single (or very few) sources
                                                                                                                                  (see Ref. 285 for an early reference, Ref. 286 for a recent one). Finally, other classes

                                                                                                                                                                                              1930022-35
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                      S. Gabici et al.
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                  of sources (such as X-ray binaries287,288 or pulsar wind nebulae289) have been con-
                                                                                                                                  sidered, and attempts to develop truly heterodox scenarios were published, as we
                                                                                                                                  briefly discussed in Sec. 3.1.5.

                                                                                                                                      In the light of these recent developments, it is mandatory to define an obser-
                                                                                                                                  vational strategy for the future of CR research. For this reason, we list below 10
                                                                                                                                  future direct and indirect observations of CRs that we consider crucial in order to
                                                                                                                                  solve the problem of their origin.

                                                                                                                                  Direct observations of CRs

                                                                                                                                  (1) Extension of the measurements of 10Be and B/C to larger energies.
                                                                                                                                       Measurements of 10Be and B/C provide us with estimates of the total residence
                                                                                                                                       time of CRs in the Galaxy (disk plus halo), and of the grammage accumulated
                                                                                                                                       by CRs during such time. The simultaneous knowledge of both these quanti-
                                                                                                                                       ties is required in order to constrain precisely the transport properties of CRs
                                                                                                                                       of a given energy. To date, measurements of 10Be are limited to energies of
                                                                                                                                          1 GeV/nucleon, while the B/C ratio is known up to 1 TeV/nucleon. It is
                                                                                                                                       thus mandatory to measure 10Be at larger energies. Also, the extension to the
                                                                                                                                       TeV domain of the measurement of B/C will provide information on the trans-
                                                                                                                                       port properties of multi-TeV CRs (currently virtually unconstrained). Note
                                                                                                                                       that the grammage accumulated by CR inside or in the vicinity of their sources
                                                                                                                                       might be non-negligible in the very high energy domain. So, measurements of
                                                                                                                                       B/C in the TeV domain might provide insights on the confinement and escape
                                                                                                                                       of CRs from their accelerators.

                                                                                                                                  (2) Extension to larger energies of the measurements of the separate elec-
                                                                                                                                       tron and positron spectra. The energy spectra of electrons and positrons
                                                                                                                                       for E larger than 1 TeV carry very important information about their produc-
                                                                                                                                       tion mechanisms, the space distribution of the sources (that could be different
                                                                                                                                       for e- and e+) and the properties of CR propagation. The measurements of
                                                                                                                                       the magnetic spectrometer AMS extend to a maximum energy E  1 TeV. At
                                                                                                                                       higher energy, valuable measurements of the flux for the sum (e- + e+) have
                                                                                                                                       been obtained by calorimeters (in space) and C erenkov telescopes, however, the
                                                                                                                                       extension of the measurements of the separate spectra in the multi-TeV energy
                                                                                                                                       range could be of great importance to clarify the mechanisms that form the e
                                                                                                                                       spectra.

                                                                                                                                  (3) Extension to larger energies of the measurements of the antiprotons.
                                                                                                                                       This observable is currently measured with high accuracy by the AMS-02 collab-
                                                                                                                                       oration. As mentioned in Sec. 3.1.4, AMS-02 initially claimed the presence of an
                                                                                                                                       excess above 100 GeV; immediately after, more refined analyses132,133 pointed
                                                                                                                                       out only a mild ( 2) deviation with respect to the expected background from
                                                                                                                                       proton-proton collisions in the interstellar gas, computed within the standard
                                                                                                                                       framework, well constrained by B/C and other secondary/primary ratios. Still,
                                                                                                                                       the hint deserves to be better characterized, and more accurate high-energy
                                                                                                                                       data are needed. If confirmed, this anomaly may point toward a non-negligible

                                                                                                                                                                                              1930022-36
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                                                                                                             The origin of Galactic cosmic rays
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                       secondary production at the accelerators.117,119,290 Spatial-dependent diffusion
                                                                                                                                       scenarios, for instance two-zone models as the ones described in Refs. 291
                                                                                                                                       and 292 -- which seem to capture in a phenomenological way both CR transport
                                                                                                                                       within pre-existing Galactic turbulence and self-confinement due to streaming
                                                                                                                                       instability -- seem to solve the discrepancy as well. (For a discussion about
                                                                                                                                       possible dark matter implications, we refer to the recent review.280)
                                                                                                                                  (4) Measure the anisotropy of both CR nuclei and electrons. Future mea-
                                                                                                                                       surements of the anisotropy in the (dominant) nuclear component of CRs by
                                                                                                                                       existing (e.g. IceCube and HAWC) and future experiments (e.g. LHAASO) will
                                                                                                                                       greatly increase statistics, but also extend the energy range, thus enabling the
                                                                                                                                       study of the energy dependence of small-scale anisotropies. It has been argued
                                                                                                                                       (without a detailed theoretical study though) that the interpretation in terms
                                                                                                                                       of magnetic turbulence should lead to rather fast variations of the anisotropy
                                                                                                                                       patterns with energy. Thus energy-dependence might be the smoking gun in
                                                                                                                                       the interpretation of small-scale anisotropies. In addition, observatories that
                                                                                                                                       can also target the (subdominant) component of CR electrons (and positrons)
                                                                                                                                       have the potential of setting bounds on (if not detecting) an anisotropy. While
                                                                                                                                       the electron channel might be much more strongly limited by statistics, the
                                                                                                                                       level of anisotropy could likely be larger, due to the stronger impact of a few,
                                                                                                                                       nearby sources. Both a detection or stronger bounds would allow important
                                                                                                                                       inferences on the origin of the positron excess.
                                                                                                                                  (5) Improved measurements of CR chemical composition, especially in
                                                                                                                                       the knee-ankle region. Studies of the chemical composition of CRs play a
                                                                                                                                       key role in the understanding of the origin of these particles, and should thus be
                                                                                                                                       encouraged at all particle energies. In particular, an improved measurement of
                                                                                                                                       the CR chemical composition in the knee and ankle regions would be particu-
                                                                                                                                       larly useful, in order to clarify which is the maximum particle energy achievable
                                                                                                                                       in Galactic accelerators, and to explore the transition from GCRs to EGCRs.
                                                                                                                                       With this respect, ISS-CREAM and HERD from space are expected to explore
                                                                                                                                       the knee region for the first time with direct measurements, but also indirect
                                                                                                                                       experiments, as e.g. LHAASO, are promising since they are expected to provide
                                                                                                                                       a superior sensitivity.

                                                                                                                                  Indirect observations of CRs

                                                                                                                                  (1) Improved gamma-ray observations of potential CR accelerators,
                                                                                                                                       especially in the multi-TeV domain. Our knowledge on particle accel-
                                                                                                                                       eration processes in SNRs and other astrophysical objects improved dramati-
                                                                                                                                       cally with the advent of the present generation of gamma-ray instruments (both
                                                                                                                                       ground based and space borne). Future instruments characterized by a superior
                                                                                                                                       sensitivity, and by improved angular and energy resolutions will allow, on one
                                                                                                                                       hand, to study in much more detail already known sources and, on the other,
                                                                                                                                       to increase dramatically the number of known sources. Having a better view of

                                                                                                                                                                                              1930022-37
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                      S. Gabici et al.
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                       already known gamma-ray sources will translate into more stringent constraints
                                                                                                                                       on the acceleration processes operating at such objects. Detecting more sources
                                                                                                                                       will make possible population studies, aimed at identifying the global CR out-
                                                                                                                                       put from given classes of sources. Thit task will be certainly performed by CTA
                                                                                                                                       in the TeV domain, but hopefully also by other ground based and, in the GeV
                                                                                                                                       domain, by space born instruments. Observation in the multi-TeV domain, cur-
                                                                                                                                       rently poorly explored due to lack of sensitivity, should be apriority, due to their
                                                                                                                                       importance in connection to the search for CR PeVatrons.
                                                                                                                                  (2) Measure the Galactic diffuse gamma-ray emission above TeV ener-
                                                                                                                                       gies. This very challenging task is currently pursued by the HAWC observa-
                                                                                                                                       tory.293,294 In the future, the C erenkov Telescope Array (CTA)295 -- currently
                                                                                                                                       under construction -- and forthcoming air shower arrays such as LHAASO296
                                                                                                                                       and possibly a Southern Hemisphere extension to HAWC, will provide a very
                                                                                                                                       significant increase in sensitivity and angular resolution in the multi-TeV
                                                                                                                                       regime. CTA in particular has the opportunity to focus on the emission from
                                                                                                                                       large individual clouds in the Galactic ridge and across the whole Galactic
                                                                                                                                       plane. The analysis of multi-TeV diffuse emission will be of paramount impor-
                                                                                                                                       tance to confirm or constrain the spectral trends identified in Fermi-LAT data
                                                                                                                                       detailed in Sec. 3.3.2 and understand the mechanism of CR confinement in the
                                                                                                                                       TeV-PeV domain.
                                                                                                                                  (3) Measuring the Galactic diffuse gamma-ray emission at MeV ener-
                                                                                                                                       gies and below. Proposed missions at MeV energies, such as AMEGO,c
                                                                                                                                       e-ASTROGAM297 (and the All-Sky ASTROGAM), COSI,d and GalCenExe
                                                                                                                                       would allow to access a variety of features -- including in particular the 511 keV
                                                                                                                                       line from e+e- annihilation, and the nuclear de-excitation lines -- and to
                                                                                                                                       probe the low-energy CRs, their distribution, density, and spectral informa-
                                                                                                                                       tion throughout the Galaxy. The latter aspect is particularly important to the
                                                                                                                                       aim of understanding the CR interplay with the ISM: for instance, the interac-
                                                                                                                                       tions of low-energy CRs (that are responsible for the heating and ionization of
                                                                                                                                       the interstellar gas), and the transport properties of the low-energy CR popu-
                                                                                                                                       lation filling highly complex regions such as superbubbles. For more details see
                                                                                                                                       for example the white paper on ISM and CRs with gamma-ray observations at
                                                                                                                                       MeV energies submitted to the Astro2020 Decadal Survey.298
                                                                                                                                  (4) Neutrino observations in the southern sky. Neutrino observations will
                                                                                                                                       allow for an unambiguous identification of the sites where GCRs are accel-
                                                                                                                                       erated. In the upcoming future, the detection of neutrino point sources will
                                                                                                                                       be among the primary goals of the KM3NeT/ARCA detector,299 which will
                                                                                                                                       observe the southern sky (in the track channel) with unprecedented accuracy.

                                                                                                                                  c https://asd.gsfc.nasa.gov/amego/.
                                                                                                                                  dhttp://cosi.ssl.berkeley.edu
                                                                                                                                  eMoiseev's talk at the 12th INTEGRAL Conference and AHEAD Gamma-ray workshop, February
                                                                                                                                  2019, Geneva.

                                                                                                                                                                                              1930022-38
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                                                                                                             The origin of Galactic cosmic rays
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                       A joint effort carried on by both current and future collaborations can also pos-
                                                                                                                                       sibly identify a diffuse component associated to the GCR population (see for
                                                                                                                                       instance the recent joint analysis by ANTARES and IceCube300): As already
                                                                                                                                       mentioned in the context of TeV gamma rays, such a detection can shed light
                                                                                                                                       on scenarios characterized by different hadronic CR spectra in different regions
                                                                                                                                       of the Galaxy213 (Sec. 3.3.3).
                                                                                                                                  (5) Solar modulation or Voyager-like observations. The shapes of the CR
                                                                                                                                       spectra at low energy (E 10 GeV) also carry very valuable information
                                                                                                                                       about the CR sources and the properties of Galactic propagation. For example,
                                                                                                                                       according to many models, the signature of energy losses on the e spectra
                                                                                                                                       should appear at particle energies of order few GeV. Also, in models where CR
                                                                                                                                       positrons are generated by a new nonstandard source, the transition energy
                                                                                                                                       where the new source becomes dominant is of order 10 GeV. In this low energy
                                                                                                                                       range the effects of solar modulations are however important, and to extract
                                                                                                                                       information about the interstellar spectra from observations performed near
                                                                                                                                       the Earth it is necessary to have a sufficiently good understanding of the solar
                                                                                                                                       effects. Measurements of the CR spectra over an extended period of time, that
                                                                                                                                       covers a broad range of solar activity states, and a comparison with the mea-
                                                                                                                                       surements obtained by Voyager at the boundary of heliosphere, are necessary
                                                                                                                                       to construct and test models for the solar modulation effects. This is not only
                                                                                                                                       a valuable program in itself (with the heliosphere a smaller scale "laboratory"
                                                                                                                                       for the study of Galactic propagation), but would allow to interpret correctly
                                                                                                                                       the CR spectra also at low energy.

                                                                                                                                      In addition to all of the above, it should be also noted that the unprecedented
                                                                                                                                  quality of available CR data requires an equally accurate knowledge of the cross-
                                                                                                                                  sections describing CR interactions. Their availability is mandatory in order to
                                                                                                                                  interpret correct data, and an experimental work in this direction has to be consid-
                                                                                                                                  ered as a priority.301,302

                                                                                                                                      We conclude by reminding that the goal of this review was to provide a critical
                                                                                                                                  analysis of the standard (orthodox) scenario for CR origin which is broadly accepted
                                                                                                                                  in our community. The key aspects of this scenario (shock acceleration at SNR
                                                                                                                                  shocks plus diffusive confinement of CRs in a magnetized halo) have been reviewed,
                                                                                                                                  and it has been shown how its predictions are questioned by a number of recent
                                                                                                                                  (and not so recent) observations. Even though, to date, it is not possible to say
                                                                                                                                  whether a radical change of paradigm is needed, rather than a minor modification
                                                                                                                                  of orthodoxy, we believe that a critical attitude as well as the development of
                                                                                                                                  alternative or even heterodox scenarios will greatly benefit the quest for the origin
                                                                                                                                  of CRs.

                                                                                                                                  Acknowledgments

                                                                                                                                  This research was supported by the Munich Institute for Astro- and Particle Physics
                                                                                                                                  (MIAPP) of the DFG cluster of excellence "Origin and Structure of the universe"

                                                                                                                                                                                              1930022-39
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                      S. Gabici et al.
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                  (The high energy Universe: gamma ray, neutrino, and cosmic ray astronomy, 26th
                                                                                                                                  February-23rd March 2018). SG acknowledges support from Agence Nationale de la
                                                                                                                                  Recherche (grant ANR-17-CE31-0014) and from the Observatory of Paris (Action
                                                                                                                                  F´ed´eratrice CTA). CE acknowledges the European Commission for support under
                                                                                                                                  the H2020-MSCA-IF-2016 action, Grant No. 751311 GRAPES Galactic cosmic RAy
                                                                                                                                  Propagation: An Extensive Study. EO acknowledges support from NASA Grant No.
                                                                                                                                  NNX16AF27G and from the agreement ASI-INAF n.2017-14-H.0. DG has received
                                                                                                                                  financial support through the Postdoctoral Junior Leader Fellowship Programme
                                                                                                                                  from la Caixa Banking Foundation (Grant No. LCF/BQ/LI18/11630014).

                                                                                                                                  References

                                                                                                                                     1. V. L. Ginzburg and S. I. Syrovatskii, The Origin of Cosmic Rays (1964), ISBN:
                                                                                                                                         978-0-08-013526-7, doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/C2013-0-05547-8.

                                                                                                                                     2. V. S. Berezinsky, S. V. Bulanov, V. A. Dogiel and V. S. Ptuskin, Astrophysics of
                                                                                                                                         Cosmic Rays, ed. V. L. Ginzburg (North-Holland, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 1990).

                                                                                                                                     3. T. Gaisser, R. Engel and E. Resconi, Cosmic Rays and Particle Physics (Cambridge
                                                                                                                                         University Press, 2016).

                                                                                                                                     4. R. Alves Batista, J. Biteau, M. Bustamante et al., arXiv:1903.06714 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                     5. V. L. Ginzburg and V. S. Ptuskin, Rev. Mod. Phys. 48 (1976) 161.
                                                                                                                                     6. P. Sreekumar, D. L. Bertsch, B. L. Dingus et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 70 (1993) 127.
                                                                                                                                     7. A. A. Abdo, M. Ackermann, M. Ajello et al., Astron. Astrophys. 523 (2010) L2,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1012.1952 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                     8. A. W. Strong, T. A. Porter, S. W. Digel et al., Astrophys. J. Lett. 722 (2010) L58,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1008.4330 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                     9. R. Cowsik and L. W. Wilson, Int. Cosmic Ray Conf., Vol. 1 (Denver, Colorado,

                                                                                                                                         1973), p. 500.
                                                                                                                                   10. W. Baade and F. Zwicky, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 20 (1934) 259.
                                                                                                                                   11. D. Ter Haar, Rev. Mod. Phys. 22 (1950) 119.
                                                                                                                                   12. V. S. Ptuskin and Y. M. Khazan, Sov. Astron. 25 (1981) 547.
                                                                                                                                   13. M. Casse and J. A. Paul, Astrophys. J. 237 (1980) 236.
                                                                                                                                   14. R. Trotta, G. J´ohannesson, I. V. Moskalenko et al., Astrophys. J. 729 (2011) 106,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1011.0037 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                   15. M. Ackermann, M. Ajello, W. B. Atwood et al., Astrophys. J. 750 (2012) 3,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1202.4039 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                   16. C. Evoli, D. Gaggero, D. Grasso and L. Maccione, J. Cosmol. Astropart. Phys. 10

                                                                                                                                         (2008) 018, arXiv:0807.4730.
                                                                                                                                   17. A. W. Strong, I. V. Moskalenko and V. S. Ptuskin, Ann. Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci. 57

                                                                                                                                         (2007) 285, arXiv:astro-ph/0701517.
                                                                                                                                   18. V. S. Ptuskin, F. C. Jones, E. S. Seo and R. Sina, Adv. Space Res. 37 (2006) 1909.
                                                                                                                                   19. G. F. Krymskii, Sov. Phys. Dokl. 22 (1977) 327.
                                                                                                                                   20. W. I. Axford, E. Leer and G. Skadron, Int. Cosmic Ray Conf., Vol. 11 (Budapest,

                                                                                                                                         Hungary, 1977), p. 132.
                                                                                                                                   21. A. R. Bell, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 182 (1978) 147.
                                                                                                                                   22. R. D. Blandford and J. P. Ostriker, Astrophys. J. Lett. 221 (1978) L29.
                                                                                                                                   23. V. S. Ptuskin and V. N. Zirakashvili, Astron. Astrophys. 429 (2005) 755, arXiv:astro-

                                                                                                                                         ph/0408025.
                                                                                                                                   24. A. R. Bell, K. M. Schure, B. Reville and G. Giacinti, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.

                                                                                                                                         431 (2013) 415, arXiv:1301.7264 [astro-ph.HE].

                                                                                                                                                                                              1930022-40
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                                                                                                           The origin of Galactic cosmic rays
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                  25. F. A. Aharonian, Astropart. Phys. 43 (2013) 71.
                                                                                                                                  26. D. Caprioli, J. Cosmol. Astropart. Phys. 5 (2011) 026, arXiv:1103.2624 [astro-

                                                                                                                                        ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  27. D. Gaggero, F. Zandanel, P. Cristofari and S. Gabici, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.

                                                                                                                                        475 (2018) 5237, arXiv:1710.05038 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  28. A. R. Bell, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 353 (2004) 550.
                                                                                                                                  29. V. N. Zirakashvili and V. S. Ptuskin, The influence of the Alfv´enic drift on the shape

                                                                                                                                        of cosmic ray spectra in SNRs, in American Institute of Physics Conference Series,
                                                                                                                                        eds. F. A. Aharonian, W. Hofmann and F. Rieger, American Institute of Physics
                                                                                                                                        Conference Series, Vol. 1085 (2008), pp. 336-339. arXiv:0807.2754.
                                                                                                                                  30. D. Caprioli, P. Blasi, E. Amato and M. Vietri, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 395
                                                                                                                                        (2009) 895, arXiv:0807.4261.
                                                                                                                                  31. S. Recchia and S. Gabici, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 474 (2018) L42,
                                                                                                                                        arXiv:1710.01111 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  32. P. Blasi, G. Morlino, R. Bandiera et al., Astrophys. J. 755 (2012) 121, arXiv:1202.
                                                                                                                                        3080 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  33. S. Gabici, Mem. Soc. Astron. Ital. 82 (2011) 760, arXiv:1108.4844 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  34. J.-P. Meyer, L. O. Drury and D. C. Ellison, Astrophys. J. 487 (1997) 182,
                                                                                                                                        arXiv:astro-ph/9704267.
                                                                                                                                  35. M. E. Wiedenbeck, W. R. Binns, A. C. Cummings et al., Space Sci. Rev. 130 (2007)
                                                                                                                                        415.
                                                                                                                                  36. D. C. Ellison, L. O. Drury and J.-P. Meyer, Astrophys. J. 487 (1997) 197,
                                                                                                                                        arXiv:astro-ph/9704293.
                                                                                                                                  37. D. Caprioli, D. T. Yi and A. Spitkovsky, Phys. Rev. Lett. 119 (2017) 171101,
                                                                                                                                        arXiv:1704.08252 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  38. L. O. Drury, F. A. Aharonian and H. J. Voelk, Astron. Astrophys. 287 (1994) 959,
                                                                                                                                        arXiv:astro-ph/9305037.
                                                                                                                                  39. F. Acero, M. Ackermann, M. Ajello et al., Astrophys. J. Suppl. 224 (2016) 8,
                                                                                                                                        arXiv:1511.06778 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  40. H. E. S. S. Collab. (H. Abdalla et al.), Astron. Astrophys. 612 (2018) A3,
                                                                                                                                        arXiv:1802.05172 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  41. A. A. Abdo, M. Ackermann, M. Ajello et al., Astrophys. J. 734 (2011) 28,
                                                                                                                                        arXiv:1103.5727 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  42. H. E. S. S. Collab. (H. Abdalla et al.), Astron. Astrophys. 612 (2018) A6,
                                                                                                                                        arXiv:1609.08671 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  43. J. D. Finke and C. D. Dermer, Astrophys. J. 751 (2012) 65, arXiv:1203.4242 [astro-
                                                                                                                                        ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  44. S. Gabici and F. A. Aharonian, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 445 (2014) L70,
                                                                                                                                        arXiv:1406.2322 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  45. H. E. S. S. Collab. (H. Abdalla et al.), Astron. Astrophys. 612 (2018) A1,
                                                                                                                                        arXiv:1804.02432 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  46. P. Cristofari, S. Gabici, S. Casanova et al., Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 434 (2013)
                                                                                                                                        2748, arXiv:1302.2150 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  47. P. Cristofari, S. Gabici, T. B. Humensky et al., Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 471
                                                                                                                                        (2017) 201, arXiv:1709.01102 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  48. S. Gabici, F. A. Aharonian and S. Casanova, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 396 (2009)
                                                                                                                                        1629, arXiv:0901.4549 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  49. S. Gabici and T. Montmerle, Int. Cosmic Ray Conf. (The Hague, The Netherlands,
                                                                                                                                        2015), p. 29, arXiv:1510.02102 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  50. A. Strong, Nucl. Part. Phys. Proc. 297-299 (2018) 165.

                                                                                                                                                                                            1930022-41
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                      S. Gabici et al.
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                   51. M. Cardillo, M. Tavani, A. Giuliani et al., Astron. Astrophys. 565 (2014) A74,
                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1403.1250 [astro-ph.HE].

                                                                                                                                   52. M. Cardillo, E. Amato and P. Blasi, Astron. Astrophys. 595 (2016) A58,
                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1604.02321 [astro-ph.HE].

                                                                                                                                   53. H. E. S. S. Collab. (H. Abdalla et al.), arXiv:1609.00600 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                   54. M. Ajello, L. Baldini, G. Barbiellini et al., Astrophys. J. 819 (2016) 98, arXiv:1601.

                                                                                                                                         06534 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                   55. A. D. Panov, J. H. Adams, H. S. Ahn et al., Bull. Russ. Acad. Sci.: Phys. 73 (2009)

                                                                                                                                         564.
                                                                                                                                   56. AMS Collab. (M. Aguilar et al.), Phys. Rev. Lett. 114 (2015) 171103.
                                                                                                                                   57. AMS Collab. (M. Aguilar et al.), Phys. Rev. Lett. 115 (2015) 211101.
                                                                                                                                   58. K. Abe, H. Fuke, S. Haino et al., Astrophys. J. 822 (2016) 65, arXiv:1506.01267

                                                                                                                                         [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                   59. Y. S. Yoon et al., Astrophys. J. 728 (2011) 122, arXiv:1102.2575 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                   60. O. Adriani, G. C. Barbarino, G. A. Bazilevskaya et al., Science 332 (2011) 69,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1103.4055 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                   61. C. Evoli, R. Aloisio and P. Blasi, Phys. Rev. D 99(10), 103023, doi:10.1103/

                                                                                                                                         PhysRevD.99.103023.
                                                                                                                                   62. A. D. Erlykin and A. W. Wolfendale, J. Phys. G Nucl. Phys. 42 (2015) 075201.
                                                                                                                                   63. Y. Ohira and K. Ioka, Astrophys. J. 729 (2011) L13.
                                                                                                                                   64. M. A. Malkov, P. H. Diamond and R. Z. Sagdeev, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108 (2012)

                                                                                                                                         081104, arXiv:1110.5335 [astro-ph.GA].
                                                                                                                                   65. A. Hanusch, T. Liseykina and M. Malkov, arXiv:1803.00428 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                   66. N. Tomassetti, Astrophys. J. 815 (2015) L1, arXiv:1511.04460 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                   67. R. Aloisio and P. Blasi, J. Cosmol. Astropart. Phys. 7 (2013) 001, arXiv:1306.2018

                                                                                                                                         [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                   68. C. Evoli, I. Cholis, D. Grasso et al., Phys. Rev. D 85 (2012) 123511, arXiv:1108.0664

                                                                                                                                         [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                   69. N. Tomassetti, Astrophys. J. 752 (2012) L13, arXiv:1204.4492 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                   70. V. Ptuskin, V. Zirakashvili and E.-S. Seo, Astrophys. J. 763 (2013) 47,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1212.0381 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                   71. V. I. Zatsepin and N. V. Sokolskaya, Astron. Astrophys. 458 (2006) 1, arXiv:astro-

                                                                                                                                         ph/0601475.
                                                                                                                                   72. Q. Yuan, B. Zhang and X.-J. Bi, Phys. Rev. D 84 (2011) 043002, arXiv:1104.3357

                                                                                                                                         [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                   73. Y. G´enolini, P. D. Serpico, M. Boudaud et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 119 (2017) 241101.
                                                                                                                                   74. M. Aguilar et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 120 (2018) 021101.
                                                                                                                                   75. P. Blasi, E. Amato and P. D. Serpico, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109 (2012) 061101,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1207.3706 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                   76. R. Kulsrud and W. P. Pearce, Astrophys. J. 156 (1969) 445.
                                                                                                                                   77. A. J. Farmer and P. Goldreich, Astrophys. J. 604 (2004) 671, arXiv:astro-

                                                                                                                                         ph/0311400.
                                                                                                                                   78. C. Evoli, P. Blasi, G. Morlino and R. Aloisio, Phys. Rev. Lett. 121 (2018) 021102,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1806.04153 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                   79. L. O. Drury and A. W. Strong, Astron. Astrophys. 597 (2017) A117,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1608.04227 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                   80. A. Thornbury and L. O. Drury, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 442 (2014) 3010,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1404.2104 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                   81. D. Maurin, A. Putze and L. Derome, Astron. Astrophys. 516 (2010) A67,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1001.0553 [astro-ph.HE].

                                                                                                                                                                                              1930022-42
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                                                                                                             The origin of Galactic cosmic rays
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                   82. G. Di Bernardo, C. Evoli, D. Gaggero et al., Astropart. Phys. 34 (2010) 274,
                                                                                                                                         arXiv:0909.4548 [astro-ph.HE].

                                                                                                                                   83. V. S. Ptuskin, I. V. Moskalenko, F. C. Jones et al., Astrophys. J. 642 (2006) 902,
                                                                                                                                         arXiv:astro-ph/0510335.

                                                                                                                                   84. C. Evoli and H. Yan, Astrophys. J. 782 (2014) 36, arXiv:1310.5732 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                   85. Q. Yuan, S.-J. Lin, K. Fang and X.-J. Bi, Phys. Rev. D 95 (2017) 083007,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1701.06149 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                   86. A. A. Abdo, M. Ackermann, M. Ajello et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 102 (2009) 181101,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:0905.0025 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                   87. AMS Collab. (M. Aguilar et al.), Phys. Rev. Lett. 113 (2014) 121102.
                                                                                                                                   88. AMS Collab. (M. Aguilar et al.), Phys. Rev. Lett. 113 (2014) 221102.
                                                                                                                                   89. A. W. Strong, E. Orlando and T. R. Jaffe, Astron. Astrophys. 534 (2011) A54,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1108.4822 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                   90. D. Gaggero, L. Maccione, G. Di Bernardo et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 111 (2013) 021102,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1304.6718 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                   91. E. Orlando, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 475 (2018) 2724, arXiv:1712.07127 [astro-

                                                                                                                                         ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                   92. F. Aharonian, A. G. Akhperjanian, U. Barres de Almeida et al., Phys. Rev. Lett.

                                                                                                                                         101 (2008) 261104, arXiv:0811.3894.
                                                                                                                                   93. F. Aharonian, A. G. Akhperjanian, G. Anton et al., Astron. Astrophys. 508 (2009)

                                                                                                                                         561, arXiv:0905.0105 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                   94. D. Kerszberg, M. Kraus, D. Kolitzus [for the H.E.S.S. Collab.] et al., The cosmic-ray

                                                                                                                                         electron spectrum measured with H. E. S. S., Presentation at the 35th Int. Cosmic
                                                                                                                                         Ray Conf., Busan, Korea (2017).
                                                                                                                                   95. VERITAS Collab. (A. Archer et al.), Phys. Rev. D 98 (2018) 062004,
                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1808.10028 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                   96. F. A. Aharonian, A. M. Atoyan and H. J. Voelk, Astron. Astrophys. 294 (1995) L41.
                                                                                                                                   97. R. L´opez-Coto, R. D. Parsons, J. A. Hinton and G. Giacinti, arXiv:1811.04123 [astro-
                                                                                                                                         ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                   98. S. Recchia, S. Gabici, F. A. Aharonian and J. Vink, arXiv:1811.07551 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                   99. Calet Collab. (O. Adriani et al.), Phys. Rev. Lett. 119 (2017) 181101,
                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1712.01711 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  100. DAMPE Collab. (G. Ambrosi et al.), Nature 552 (2017) 63, arXiv:1711.10981 [astro-
                                                                                                                                         ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  101. P. Mertsch, J. Cosmol. Astropart. Phys. 1811 (2018) 045, arXiv:1809.05104 [astro-
                                                                                                                                         ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  102. O. Adriani, G. C. Barbarino, G. A. Bazilevskaya et al., Nature 458 (2009) 607,
                                                                                                                                         arXiv:0810.4995.
                                                                                                                                  103. HEAT Collab. (S. W. Barwick et al.), Astrophys. J. 482 (1997) L191, arXiv:astro-
                                                                                                                                         ph/9703192.
                                                                                                                                  104. AMS-01 Collab. (M. Aguilar et al.), Phys. Lett. B 646 (2007) 145, arXiv:astro-
                                                                                                                                         ph/0703154.
                                                                                                                                  105. AMS Collab. (M. Aguilar et al.), Phys. Rev. Lett. 110 (2013) 141102.
                                                                                                                                  106. R. Cowsik and B. Burch, Phys. Rev. D 82 (2010) 023009.
                                                                                                                                  107. R. Cowsik, B. Burch and T. Madziwa-Nussinov, Astrophys. J. 786 (2014) 124,
                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1305.1242 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  108. R. Cowsik and T. Madziwa-Nussinov, Astrophys. J. 827 (2016) 119.
                                                                                                                                  109. B. Katz, K. Blum and E. Waxman, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 405 (2010) 1458,
                                                                                                                                         arXiv:0907.1686 [astro-ph.HE].

                                                                                                                                                                                              1930022-43
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                      S. Gabici et al.
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                  110. K. Blum, B. Katz and E. Waxman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111 (2013) 211101,
                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1305.1324 [astro-ph.HE].

                                                                                                                                  111. M. Kruskal, S. P. Ahlen and G. Tarl, Astrophys. J. 818 (2016) 70, arXiv:1410.7239
                                                                                                                                         [astro-ph.HE].

                                                                                                                                  112. P. Lipari, Phys. Rev. D 95 (2017) 063009, arXiv:1608.02018 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  113. P. Lipari, arXiv:1810.03195 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  114. L. Bergstr¨om, T. Bringmann and J. Edsj¨o, Phys. Rev. D 78 (2008) 103520,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:0808.3725.
                                                                                                                                  115. D. Hooper, P. Blasi and P. D. Serpico, J. Cosmol. Astropart. Phys. 1 (2009) 025,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:0810.1527.
                                                                                                                                  116. D. Grasso, S. Profumo, A. W. Strong et al., Astropart. Phys. 32 (2009) 140,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:0905.0636 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  117. P. Blasi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 103 (2009) 051104, arXiv:0903.2794 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  118. P. Mertsch and S. Sarkar, Phys. Rev. Lett. 103 (2009) 081104, arXiv:0905.3152

                                                                                                                                         [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  119. P. Mertsch and S. Sarkar, Phys. Rev. D 90 (2014) 061301, arXiv:1402.0855 [astro-

                                                                                                                                         ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  120. Z. Weng [for the AMS Collab.], Precision measurement of electron and positron fluxes

                                                                                                                                         in primary cosmic rays with the alpha magnetic spectrometer on the international
                                                                                                                                         space station, Presentation at the 39th Int. Conf. High Energy Physics, Seoul, Korea
                                                                                                                                         (2018).
                                                                                                                                  121. F. Donato, D. Maurin, P. Brun et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 102 (2009) 071301, arXiv:
                                                                                                                                         0810.5292.
                                                                                                                                  122. M. Cirelli, M. Kadastik, M. Raidal and A. Strumia, Nucl. Phys. B 813 (2009) 1,
                                                                                                                                         arXiv:0809.2409 [hep-ph].
                                                                                                                                  123. M. Boezio, V. Bonvicini, P. Schiavon et al., Astrophys. J. 561 (2001) 787, arXiv:
                                                                                                                                         astro-ph/0103513.
                                                                                                                                  124. A. Moiseev, K. Yoshimura, I. Ueda et al., Astrophys. J. 474 (1997) 479.
                                                                                                                                  125. S. Orito, T. Maeno, H. Matsunaga et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 84 (2000) 1078,
                                                                                                                                         arXiv:astro-ph/9906426.
                                                                                                                                  126. BESS Collab. (K. Abe et al.), Phys. Lett. B 670 (2008) 103, arXiv:0805.1754.
                                                                                                                                  127. PAMELA Collab. (O. Adriani et al.), Phys. Rev. Lett. 105 (2010) 121101,
                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1007.0821 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  128. O. Adriani, G. A. Bazilevskaya, G. C. Barbarino et al., Sov. J. Exp. Theoret. Phys.
                                                                                                                                         Lett. 96 (2013) 621.
                                                                                                                                  129. M. Aguilar et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 117 (2016) 091103.
                                                                                                                                  130. R. Kappl and M. W. Winkler, J. Cosmol. Astropart. Phys. 9 (2014) 051,
                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1408.0299 [hep-ph].
                                                                                                                                  131. M. di Mauro, F. Donato, A. Goudelis and P. D. Serpico, Phys. Rev. D 90 (2014)
                                                                                                                                         085017, arXiv:1408.0288 [hep-ph].
                                                                                                                                  132. G. Giesen, M. Boudaud, Y. G´enolini et al., J. Cosmol. Astropart. Phys. 9 (2015)
                                                                                                                                         023, arXiv:1504.04276 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  133. C. Evoli, D. Gaggero and D. Grasso, J. Cosmol. Astropart. Phys. 12 (2015) 039,
                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1504.05175 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  134. AMS Collab. (M. Aguilar et al.), Phys. Rev. Lett. 122 (2019) 041102.
                                                                                                                                  135. P. Lipari, arXiv:1902.06173 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  136. R. M. Kulsrud, Plasma Physics for Astrophysics (Princeton University Press, 2005),
                                                                                                                                         ISBN: 9780691120737.
                                                                                                                                  137. J. R. Jokipii, Astrophys. J. 146 (1966) 480.
                                                                                                                                  138. C. F. Kennel and F. Engelmann, Phys. Fluids 9 (1966) 2377.

                                                                                                                                                                                              1930022-44
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                                                                                                             The origin of Galactic cosmic rays
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                  139. D. E. Hall and P. A. Sturrock, Phys. Fluids 10 (1967) 2620.
                                                                                                                                  140. K. Hasselmann and G. Wibberenz, Astrophys. J. 162 (1970) 1049.
                                                                                                                                  141. V. S. Ptuskin and J. F. Ormes, Expected anisotropy of very high energy electrons,

                                                                                                                                         in Proc. 24th Int. Cosmic Ray Conf., Rome, Italy (1995), p. 56.
                                                                                                                                  142. I. Buesching, O. C. de Jager, M. S. Potgieter and C. Venter, Astrophys. J. 678 (2008)

                                                                                                                                         L39, arXiv:0804.0220 [astro-ph].
                                                                                                                                  143. G. Di Bernardo, C. Evoli, D. Gaggero et al., Astropart. Phys. 34 (2011) 528, arXiv:

                                                                                                                                         1010.0174 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  144. E. Borriello, L. Maccione and A. Cuoco, Astropart. Phys. 35 (2012) 537,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1012.0041 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  145. T. Linden and S. Profumo, Astrophys. J. 772 (2013) 18, arXiv:1304.1791 [astro-

                                                                                                                                         ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  146. A. H. Compton and I. A. Getting, Phys. Rev. 47 (1935) 817.
                                                                                                                                  147. L. J. Gleeson and W. I. Axford, Astrophys. Space Sci. 2 (1968) 431.
                                                                                                                                  148. G. Giacinti and J. G. Kirk, arXiv:1610.06134 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  149. P. Mertsch and S. Funk, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114 (2015) 021101, arXiv:1408.3630 [astro-

                                                                                                                                         ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  150. M. Ahlers and P. Mertsch, Prog. Part. Nucl. Phys. 94 (2017) 184, arXiv:1612.01873

                                                                                                                                         [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  151. A. M. Hillas, J. Phys. G Nucl. Phys. 31 (2005) R95.
                                                                                                                                  152. R. Kumar and D. Eichler, Astrophys. J. 785 (2014) 129.
                                                                                                                                  153. A. D. Erlykin and A. W. Wolfendale, Astropart. Phys. 25 (2006) 183, arXiv:astro-

                                                                                                                                         ph/0601290 [astro-ph].
                                                                                                                                  154. V. S. Ptuskin, F. C. Jones, E. S. Seo and R. Sina, Adv. Space Res. 37 (2006) 1909.
                                                                                                                                  155. L. G. Sveshnikova, O. N. Strelnikova and V. S. Ptuskin, Astropart. Phys. 50-52

                                                                                                                                         (2013) 33, arXiv:1301.2028 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  156. M. Ahlers, Phys. Rev. Lett. 117 (2016) 151103, arXiv:1605.06446 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  157. P. Blasi and E. Amato, J. Cosmol. Astropart. Phys. 1201 (2012) 011,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1105.4529 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  158. M. Pohl and D. Eichler, Astrophys. J. 766 (2013) 4, arXiv:1208.5338 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  159. R. Cowsik and L. W. Wilson, The nested leaky box model for galactic cosmic rays, in

                                                                                                                                         14th Int. Cosmic Ray Conf. (ICRC 1975 ), Munich, Germany, August 15-29 (1975),
                                                                                                                                         pp. 659-664.
                                                                                                                                  160. C. Evoli, D. Gaggero, D. Grasso and L. Maccione, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108 (2012)
                                                                                                                                         211102, arXiv:1203.0570 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  161. Tibet AS-gamma Collab. (M. Amenomori), Science 314 (2006) 439, arXiv:astro-
                                                                                                                                         ph/0610671 [astro-ph].
                                                                                                                                  162. A. A. Abdo et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 101 (2008) 221101, arXiv:0801.3827 [astro-ph].
                                                                                                                                  163. ARGO-YBJ Collab. (B. Bartoli et al.), Phys. Rev. D 88 (2013) 082001,
                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1309.6182 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  164. IceCube Collab. (R. Abbasi et al.), Astrophys. J. 740 (2011) 16, arXiv:1105.2326
                                                                                                                                         [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  165. HAWC Collab. (A. U. Abeysekara et al.), Astrophys. J. 796 (2014) 108,
                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1408.4805 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  166. IceCube Collab. (M. G. Aartsen et al.), Astrophys. J. 826 (2016) 220,
                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1603.01227 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  167. A. U. Abeysekara et al., arXiv:1805.01847 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  168. IceCube, HAWC Collabs. (J. C. D. Velez et al.), PoS ICRC2017 (2018) 539,
                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1708.03005 [astro-ph.HE].

                                                                                                                                                                                              1930022-45
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                      S. Gabici et al.
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                  169. M. Salvati and B. Sacco, Astron. Astrophys. 485 (2008) 527, arXiv:0802.2181 [astro-
                                                                                                                                         ph].

                                                                                                                                  170. E. Battaner, J. Castellano and M. Masip, Astron. Astrophys. 527 (2011) 5,
                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1006.2346 [astro-ph.HE].

                                                                                                                                  171. J. P. Harding, C. L. Fryer and S. Mendel, Astrophys. J. 822 (2016) 102,
                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1510.02487 [astro-ph.HE].

                                                                                                                                  172. L. Drury and F. Aharonian, Astropart. Phys. 29 (2008) 420, arXiv:0802.4403 [astro-
                                                                                                                                         ph].

                                                                                                                                  173. M. A. Malkov, P. H. Diamond, L. C. Drury and R. Z. Sagdeev, Astrophys. J. 721
                                                                                                                                         (2010) 750, arXiv:1005.1312 [astro-ph.GA].

                                                                                                                                  174. A. Lazarian and P. Desiati, Astrophys. J. 722 (2010) 188, arXiv:1008.1981 [astro-
                                                                                                                                         ph.CO].

                                                                                                                                  175. P. Desiati and A. Lazarian, Astrophys. J. 762 (2013) 44, arXiv:1111.3075 [astro-
                                                                                                                                         ph.HE].

                                                                                                                                  176. L. O'C. Drury, The problem of small angular scale structure in the cosmic ray
                                                                                                                                         anisotropy data, in Proc. 33rd Int. Cosmic Ray Conf., Rio de Janeiro, Brazil (2013),
                                                                                                                                         p. 0012. arXiv:1305.6752 [astro-ph.HE].

                                                                                                                                  177. N. A. Schwadron et al., Science 343 (2014) 988.
                                                                                                                                  178. M. Zhang, P. Zuo and N. Pogorelov, Astrophys. J. 790 (2014) 5.
                                                                                                                                  179. V. L´opez-Barquero, S. Xu, P. Desiati et al., arXiv:1610.03097 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  180. G. Giacinti and G. Sigl, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109 (2012) 071101, arXiv:1111.2536 [astro-

                                                                                                                                         ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  181. M. Ahlers and P. Mertsch, Astrophys. J. 815 (2015) L2, arXiv:1506.05488 [astro-

                                                                                                                                         ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  182. M. Pohl and R. Rettig, Understanding the anisotropy of cosmic rays at TeV and

                                                                                                                                         PeV energies, in Proc. 34th Int. Cosmic Ray Conf., The Hague, The Netherlands
                                                                                                                                         (2016), p. 451.
                                                                                                                                  183. V. L´opez-Barquero, R. Farber, S. Xu et al., Astrophys. J. 830 (2016) 19, arXiv:1509.
                                                                                                                                         00892 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  184. M. Ahlers, Phys. Rev. Lett. 112 (2014) 021101, arXiv:1310.5712 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  185. IceCube Collab. (M. G. Aartsen et al.), The IceCube neutrino observatory, Part III:
                                                                                                                                         Cosmic rays, in Proc. 33rd Int. Cosmic Ray Conf. (ICRC2013 ), Rio de Janeiro,
                                                                                                                                         Brazil, July 2-9 (2013), arXiv:1309.7006 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  186. K. Kotera, M. A. Perez-Garcia and J. Silk, Phys. Lett. B 725 (2013) 196,
                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1303.1186 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  187. J. P. Harding, arXiv:1307.6537 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  188. V. Vitale and A. Morselli [for the Fermi/LAT Collab.], arXiv:0912.3828 [astro-
                                                                                                                                         ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  189. D. Hooper and L. Goodenough, Phys. Lett. B 697 (2011) 412, arXiv:1010.2752 [hep-
                                                                                                                                         ph].
                                                                                                                                  190. T. Daylan, D. P. Finkbeiner, D. Hooper et al., Phys. Dark Univ. 12 (2016) 1,
                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1402.6703 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  191. O. Macias and C. Gordon, Phys. Rev. D 89 (2014) 063515, arXiv:1312.6671 [astro-
                                                                                                                                         ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  192. F. Calore, I. Cholis and C. Weniger, J. Cosmol. Astropart. Phys. 1503 (2015) 038,
                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1409.0042 [astro-ph.CO].
                                                                                                                                  193. K. N. Abazajian, N. Canac, S. Horiuchi and M. Kaplinghat, Phys. Rev. D 90 (2014)
                                                                                                                                         023526, arXiv:1402.4090 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  194. Fermi-LAT Collab. (M. Ackermann et al.), Astrophys. J. 840 (2017) 43,
                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1704.03910 [astro-ph.HE].

                                                                                                                                                                                              1930022-46
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                                                                                                             The origin of Galactic cosmic rays
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                  195. D. Gaggero, M. Taoso, A. Urbano et al., J. Cosmol. Astropart. Phys. 1512 (2015)
                                                                                                                                         056, arXiv:1507.06129 [astro-ph.HE].

                                                                                                                                  196. E. Carlson, T. Linden and S. Profumo, Phys. Rev. Lett. 117 (2016) 111101,
                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1510.04698 [astro-ph.HE].

                                                                                                                                  197. E. Orlando, Phys. Rev. D 99 (2019) 043007, arXiv:1901.08604 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  198. R. Bartels, S. Krishnamurthy and C. Weniger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 116 (2016) 051102,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1506.05104 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  199. S. K. Lee, M. Lisanti, B. R. Safdi et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 116 (2016) 051103,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1506.05124 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  200. E. Storm, C. Weniger and F. Calore, J. Cosmol. Astropart. Phys. 1708 (2017) 022,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1705.04065 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  201. R. Bartels, E. Storm, C. Weniger and F. Calore, arXiv:1711.04778 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  202. F. Calore, M. Di Mauro, F. Donato et al., Astrophys. J. 827 (2016) 143,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1512.06825 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  203. D. Gaggero, A. Urbano, M. Valli and P. Ullio, Phys. Rev. D 91 (2015) 083012,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1411.7623 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  204. R. Yang, F. Aharonian and C. Evoli, Phys. Rev. D 93 (2016) 123007,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1602.04710 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  205. Fermi-LAT Collab. (F. Acero et al.), Astrophys. J. Suppl. 223 (2016) 26,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1602.07246 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  206. M. Pothast, D. Gaggero, E. Storm and C. Weniger, arXiv:1807.04554 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  207. F. Aharonian, G. Peron, R. Yang et al., arXiv:1811.12118 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  208. S. Recchia, P. Blasi and G. Morlino, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 462 (2016) L88,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1604.07682 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  209. S. S. Cerri, D. Gaggero, A. Vittino et al., J. Cosmol. Astropart. Phys. 1710 (2017)

                                                                                                                                         019, arXiv:1707.07694 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  210. D. De Marco, P. Blasi and T. Stanev, J. Cosmol. Astropart. Phys. 0706 (2007) 027,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:0705.1972 [astro-ph].
                                                                                                                                  211. A. P. Snodin, A. Shukurov, G. R. Sarson et al., Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 457

                                                                                                                                         (2016) 3975, arXiv:1509.03766 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  212. S. Gabici, A. M. Taylor, R. J. White et al., Astropart. Phys. 30 (2008) 180,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:0806.2459.
                                                                                                                                  213. D. Gaggero, D. Grasso, A. Marinelli et al., Astrophys. J. 815 (2015) L25,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1504.00227 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  214. D. Gaggero, D. Grasso, A. Marinelli et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 119 (2017) 031101,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1702.01124 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  215. A. W. Strong, J. B. G. M. Bloemen, T. M. Dame et al., Astron. Astrophys. 207

                                                                                                                                         (1988) 1.
                                                                                                                                  216. S. W. Digel, I. A. Grenier, S. D. Hunter et al., Astrophys. J. 555 (2001) 12.
                                                                                                                                  217. Fermi-LAT Collab. (M. Ackermann et al.), Astrophys. J. 726 (2011) 81,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1011.0816 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  218. Fermi/LAT Collab. (A. A. Abdo et al.), Astrophys. J. 710 (2010) 133,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:0912.3618 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  219. A. W. Strong and I. V. Moskalenko, Astrophys. J. 509 (1998) 212, arXiv:astro-

                                                                                                                                         ph/9807150 [astro-ph].
                                                                                                                                  220. G. L. Case and D. Bhattacharya, Astrophys. J. 504 (1998) 761, arXiv:astro-

                                                                                                                                         ph/9807162.
                                                                                                                                  221. D. R. Lorimer, A. J. Faulkner, A. G. Lyne et al., Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 372

                                                                                                                                         (2006) 777, arXiv:astro-ph/0607640.

                                                                                                                                                                                              1930022-47
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                      S. Gabici et al.
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                  222. L. Bronfman, S. Casassus, J. May and L.-°A. Nyman, Astron. Astrophys. 358 (2000)
                                                                                                                                         521, arXiv:astro-ph/0006104.

                                                                                                                                  223. A. W. Strong, I. V. Moskalenko, O. Reimer et al., Astron. Astrophys. 422 (2004)
                                                                                                                                         L47, arXiv:astro-ph/0405275 [astro-ph].

                                                                                                                                  224. M. Su, T. R. Slatyer and D. P. Finkbeiner, Astrophys. J. 724 (2010) 1044,
                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1005.5480 [astro-ph.HE].

                                                                                                                                  225. G. Dobler, D. P. Finkbeiner, I. Cholis et al., Astrophys. J. 717 (2010) 825,
                                                                                                                                         arXiv:0910.4583 [astro-ph.HE].

                                                                                                                                  226. M. Ackermann, A. Albert, W. B. Atwood et al., Astrophys. J. 793 (2014) 64,
                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1407.7905 [astro-ph.HE].

                                                                                                                                  227. G. Dobler and D. P. Finkbeiner, Astrophys. J. 680 (2008) 1222, arXiv:0712.1038
                                                                                                                                         [astro-ph].

                                                                                                                                  228. Planck Collab. (P. A. R. Ade et al.), Astron. Astrophys. 554 (2013) A139,
                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1208.5483 [astro-ph.GA].

                                                                                                                                  229. Planck Collab. (P. A. R. Ade et al.), Astron. Astrophys. 594 (2016) A25,
                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1506.06660.

                                                                                                                                  230. F. Guo and W. G. Mathews, Astrophys. J. 756 (2012) 181, arXiv:1103.0055 [astro-
                                                                                                                                         ph.HE].

                                                                                                                                  231. H. Y. K. Yang, M. Ruszkowski, P. M. Ricker et al., Astrophys. J. 761 (2012) 185,
                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1207.4185 [astro-ph.GA].

                                                                                                                                  232. R. M. Crocker and F. Aharonian, Phys. Rev. Lett. 106 (2011) 101102,
                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1008.2658 [astro-ph.GA].

                                                                                                                                  233. K. C. Sarkar, B. B. Nath and P. Sharma, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 453 (2015)
                                                                                                                                         3827, arXiv:1505.03634 [astro-ph.GA].

                                                                                                                                  234. P. Mertsch and V. Petrosian, arXiv:1808.00330 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  235. A. A. Abdo, M. Ackermann, M. Ajello et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 103 (2009) 251101,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:0912.0973 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  236. A. A. Abdo, M. Ackermann, M. Ajello et al., Astrophys. J. 703 (2009) 1249,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:0908.1171 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  237. J.-M. Casandjian, Astrophys. J. 806 (2015) 240, arXiv:1506.00047 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  238. F. Acero, M. Ackermann, M. Ajello et al., Astrophys. J. Suppl. 223 (2016) 26,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1602.07246 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  239. C. D. Dermer, A. W. Strong, E. Orlando and L. Tibaldo [for the Fermi Collab.],

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1307.0497 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  240. A. W. Strong, arXiv:1507.05006 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  241. A. C. Cummings, E. C. Stone, B. C. Heikkila et al., Astrophys. J. 831 (2016) 18.
                                                                                                                                  242. E. Orlando and A. Strong, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 436 (2013) 2127,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1309.2947 [astro-ph.GA].
                                                                                                                                  243. G. Di Bernardo, C. Evoli, D. Gaggero et al., J. Cosmol. Astropart. Phys. 3 (2013)

                                                                                                                                         036, arXiv:1210.4546 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  244. T. Antoni, W. D. Apel, A. F. Badea et al., Astropart. Phys. 24 (2005) 1, arXiv:astro-

                                                                                                                                         ph/0505413.
                                                                                                                                  245. A. M. Hillas, J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 47 (2006) 168-177.
                                                                                                                                  246. G. Giacinti, M. Kachelrieß and D. V. Semikoz, Phys. Rev. D 91 (2015) 083009,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1502.01608 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  247. P. O. Lagage and C. J. Cesarsky, Astron. Astrophys. 125 (1983) 249.
                                                                                                                                  248. J. Vink, Astron. Astrophys. Rev. 20 (2012) 49, arXiv:1112.0576 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  249. V. N. Zirakashvili and V. S. Ptuskin, Astrophys. J. 678 (2008) 939, arXiv:0801.4488.
                                                                                                                                  250. K. M. Schure and A. R. Bell, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 435 (2013) 1174,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1307.6575 [astro-ph.HE].

                                                                                                                                                                                              1930022-48
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                                                                                                             The origin of Galactic cosmic rays
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                  251. K. M. Schure and A. R. Bell, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 437 (2014) 2802,
                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1310.7027 [astro-ph.HE].

                                                                                                                                  252. M. Cardillo, E. Amato and P. Blasi, Astropart. Phys. 69 (2015) 1, arXiv:1503.03001
                                                                                                                                         [astro-ph.HE].

                                                                                                                                  253. S. Gabici, D. Gaggero and F. Zandanel, arXiv:1610.07638 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  254. S. Gabici and F. A. Aharonian, Astrophys. J. Lett. 665 (2007) L131, arXiv:0705.3011.
                                                                                                                                  255. P. Cristofari, S. Gabici, R. Terrier and T. B. Humensky, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron.

                                                                                                                                         Soc. 479 (2018) 3415, arXiv:1803.09728 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  256. HESS Collab. (A. Abramowski et al.), Nature 531 (2016) 476, arXiv:1603.07730

                                                                                                                                         [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  257. E. Parizot, Nucl. Phys. B Proc. Suppl. 256 (2014) 197, arXiv:1410.2655 [astro-

                                                                                                                                         ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  258. J. R. H¨orandel, Astropart. Phys. 19 (2003) 193, arXiv:astro-ph/0210453.
                                                                                                                                  259. V. Ptuskin, V. Zirakashvili and E.-S. Seo, Astrophys. J. 718 (2010) 31,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1006.0034.
                                                                                                                                  260. A. M. Bykov, Astron. Astrophys. Rev. 22 (2014) 77, arXiv:1511.04608 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  261. R. E. Lingenfelter, arXiv:1807.09726 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  262. V. Tatischeff and S. Gabici, Ann. Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci. 68 (2018) 377,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1803.01794 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  263. K. Brecher and G. R. Burbidge, Astrophys. J. 174 (1972) 253.
                                                                                                                                  264. D. Gaggero, A. Urbano, M. Valli and P. Ullio, Phys. Rev. D 91 (2015) 083012,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1411.7623 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  265. M. Ackermann, M. Ajello, A. Albert et al., Astrophys. J. 799 (2015) 86,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1410.3696 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  266. M. Ackermann, A. Albert, W. B. Atwood et al., Astron. Astrophys. 586 (2016) A71,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1509.06903 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  267. M. Ackermann, M. Ajello, A. Albert et al., Astrophys. J. 836 (2017) 208,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1702.08602 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  268. N. Globus, D. Allard and E. Parizot, Phys. Rev. D 92 (2015) 021302,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1505.01377 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  269. S. Thoudam, J. P. Rachen, A. van Vlietet al., Astron. Astrophys. 595 (2016) A33,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1605.03111 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  270. R.-Y. Liu, A. M. Taylor, X.-Y. Wang and F. A. Aharonian, Phys. Rev. D 94 (2016)

                                                                                                                                         043008.
                                                                                                                                  271. A. van Vliet, arXiv:1609.03336 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  272. A. W. Strong, A. W. Wolfendale and J. Wdowczyk, Nature 241 (1973) 109.
                                                                                                                                  273. W. R. Binns, E. R. Christian, A. C. Cummings et al., Constraints on Galactic

                                                                                                                                         cosmic-ray origins from elemental composition measurements, in APS April Meeting
                                                                                                                                         Abstracts (2014), p. E9.004.
                                                                                                                                  274. B. F. Rauch, J. T. Link, K. Lodders et al., Astrophys. J. 697 (2009) 2083,
                                                                                                                                         arXiv:0906.2021 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  275. R. P. Murphy, M. Sasaki, W. R. Binns et al., Astrophys. J. 831 (2016) 148,
                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1608.08183 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  276. E. Parizot, Astron. Astrophys. 362 (2000) 786, arXiv:astro-ph/0006099.
                                                                                                                                  277. N. Prantzos, Astron. Astrophys. 542 (2012) A67, arXiv:1203.5662.
                                                                                                                                  278. J. C. Higdon and R. E. Lingenfelter, Astrophys. J. 590 (2003) 822.
                                                                                                                                  279. W. R. Binns, M. H. Israel, E. R. Christian et al., Science 352 (2016) 677.
                                                                                                                                  280. D. Gaggero and M. Valli, Adv. High Energy Phys. 2018 (2018) 3010514,
                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1802.00636 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  281. C. J. Cesarsky and T. Montmerle, Space Sci. Rev. 36 (1983) 173.

                                                                                                                                                                                              1930022-49
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com                                                                      S. Gabici et al.
   by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND on 10/21/19. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                                                                                                                                  282. F. Aharonian, R. Yang and E. de On~a Wilhelmi, arXiv:1804.02331 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  283. A. M. Bykov and G. D. Fleishman, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 255 (1992) 269.
                                                                                                                                  284. J. C. Higdon, R. E. Lingenfelter and R. Ramaty, Astrophys. J. 509 (1998) L33.
                                                                                                                                  285. A. D. Erlykin and A. W. Wolfendale, J. Phys. G Nucl. Phys. 23 (1997) 979.
                                                                                                                                  286. M. Bouyahiaoui, M. Kachelriess and D. V. Semikoz, J. Cosmol. Astropart. Phys. 1

                                                                                                                                         (2019) 046, arXiv:1812.03522 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  287. S. Heinz and R. Sunyaev, Astron. Astrophys. 390 (2002) 751, arXiv:astro-

                                                                                                                                         ph/0204183.
                                                                                                                                  288. R. P. Fender, T. J. Maccarone and Z. van Kesteren, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.

                                                                                                                                         360 (2005) 1085, arXiv:astro-ph/0504205.
                                                                                                                                  289. E. Amato, Int. J. Mod. Phys. Conf. Ser. 28 (2014) 1460160. arXiv:1312.5945 [astro-

                                                                                                                                         ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  290. I. Cholis, D. Hooper and T. Linden, Phys. Rev. D 95 (2017) 123007,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1701.04406 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  291. J. Feng, N. Tomassetti and A. Oliva, Phys. Rev. D 94 (2016) 123007,

                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1610.06182 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  292. Y.-Q. Guo and Q. Yuan, arXiv:1801.05904 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  293. R. J. Lauer, First results from HAWC: Monitoring the TeV gamma-ray sky, in

                                                                                                                                         Extragalactic Jets from Every Angle, eds. F. Massaro, C. C. Cheung, E. Lopez and
                                                                                                                                         A. Siemiginowska, IAU Symposium, Vol. 313 (Cambridge University Press, 2015),
                                                                                                                                         pp. 70-75, doi:https://doi.org/10.1017/S1743921315001891.
                                                                                                                                  294. HAWC Collab. (H. Zhou et al.), Int. Cosmic Ray Conf., Vol. 301 (Bexco, Busan,
                                                                                                                                         Korea, 2017), p. 689, arXiv:1709.03619 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  295. The Cherenkov Telescope Array Consortium (B. S. Acharya et al.), arXiv:1709.07997
                                                                                                                                         [astro-ph.IM].
                                                                                                                                  296. LHAASO Collab. (G. Di Sciascio), Nucl. Part. Phys. Proc. 279 (2016) 166,
                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1602.07600 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  297. A. De Angelis, V. Tatischeff, M. Tavani et al., Exp. Astron. 44 (2017) 25, arXiv:1611.
                                                                                                                                         02232 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  298. E. Orlando, I. Grenier, V. Tatischeff et al., arXiv:1903.05660 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  299. KM3Net Collab. (S. Adrian-Martinez et al.), J. Phys. G 43 (2016) 084001,
                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1601.07459 [astro-ph.IM].
                                                                                                                                  300. A. Albert et al., Astrophys. J. 868 (2018) L20, arXiv:1808.03531 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  301. C. Evoli, D. Gaggero, A. Vittino et al., J. Cosmol. Astropart. Phys. 7 (2018) 006,
                                                                                                                                         arXiv:1711.09616 [astro-ph.HE].
                                                                                                                                  302. Y. G´enolini, D. Maurin, I. V. Moskalenko and M. Unger, Phys. Rev. C 98 (2018)
                                                                                                                                         034611, arXiv:1803.04686 [astro-ph.HE].

                                                                                                                                                                                              1930022-50
