Mon. Not. R. astr. Soc. (1978) 182, 443-455

The acceleration of cosmic rays in shock fronts — II

*
A. R. Bell Mullard Radio Astronomy Observatory, Cavendish Laboratory,
Madingley Road, Cambridge CB3 0HE

Received 1977 August 22; in original form 1977 July 28

Summary. The acceleration to relativistic energies of the high-energy tail of
the particle distribution produced by a shock front is discussed. In order to
be accelerated, particles need to be able to pass through the shock without
being strongly deflected and it is argued, using the Earth’s bow shock as an
example, that a shock front produces large numbers of protons, and probably
electrons also, which satisfy this condition. The resulting energy spectrum of
these initially non-relativistic particles is calculated. It yields an estimate of
the density of cosmic ray particles in a shocked gas and indicates that a large
proportion of the random energy produced by a shock is given to accelerated
particles. The synchrotron radio emission from the energetic electrons in a
shocked gas is calculated, and the theoretical and observed flux densities of
two supernova remnants (Tycho’s SNR and Cas A) are compared and found
to agree satisfactorily. The implications for the minimum energy of radio
sources are considered, and the effect of multiple shocks on the cosmic ray
density evaluated.

1 Introduction

In Paper I (Bell 1978) I described a mechanism by which particles can be accelerated in the
region surrounding an astrophysical shock front, a prior condition being that the particles
are sufficiently energetic to pass through the shock itself without significant deflection. This
implies that they must have initial energies above the post-shock thermal energy, and the
purpose of the present paper is firstly to determine what the initial energy must be for effec-
tive acceleration and how many particles are injected and accelerated to high energy, and
secondly to consider the relevance of the acceleration mechanism to radio sources.

The energy necessary for injection depends on the structure of the shock front and
especially on the shock thickness. Unfortunately, shocks of high Mach number are poorly
understood (e.g. McKee 1974), and some aspects of the discussion here are correspondingly
uncertain. The situation as regards the injection of protons is relatively clear, but that for
electrons less clear and it is necessary to look for supporting evidence from the observed

* Present address: GEC-Marconi Ltd, Marconi Research Laboratories, Great Baddow, Chelmsford, Essex
CM2 8HN.

© Royal Astronomical Society * Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System

S107 ‘OZ Aqng Uo AZoouyoaT, Jo aMTsUT eTUIOFIT[eD ye /310' s[eumnolpsofxo seruUT//:dyYy WoT pepeopUMod
444 A. R. Bell

densities of cosmic ray electrons. Much of the discussion is based upon the theoretical
description of shock fronts by Tidman & Krall (1971) and the review of observations of the
Earth’s bow shock by Formisano (1974).

In Section 2, the conditions for the acceleration of a particle are considered and in
Section 3 the energy spectrum is calculated for the energy range between barely supra-
thermal and highly relativistic. The results of these sections are then combined in Section 4
to estimate the cosmic ray density produced by a shock front. This allows the radio emission
from a shocked gas to be calculated, and the values for two supernova remnants are com-
pared with observations. In Section 5, the implications for the energy requirements of radio
sources are discussed. In Section 6, the cosmic ray density is calculated for a gas which has
been shocked many times.

2 Conditions for acceleration
2.1 PROTONS

In Paper I it was assumed (i) that the particles being accelerated were sufficiently energetic
to pass through the shock, i.e. the region in which the streaming energy is randomized, with-
out significant deflection or change of kinetic energy, and (ii) that the particles were rela-
tivistic. This second assumption can be dropped without affecting the validity of the
acceleration mechanism, although the energy spectrum is different for sub-relativistic
particles. The first assumption, however, cannot be obviated since particles which are
deflected through an angle of the order of 7 by the shock have their energy changed by an
amount comparable to the energy gained in passing once from upstream to downstream and
back, as described in Paper I. Nevertheless, it is probable that the acceleration mechanism of
Paper I applies to particles which are deflected through smaller but not negligible angles.
Particles can be deflected in two ways:

(a) By the magnetic field if the gyroradius inside the shock is comparable to or less than
the shock thickness. Since the magnetic field within the shock is comparable with the down-
stream time-averaged field, this condition corresponds to the shock thickness being greater
than the downstream gyroradius.

(b) By the electric field resulting from plasma oscillations within the shock. The poten-
tials within the shock are unlikely to exceed 4mpuz/e (McKee 1974), the potential required
to stop a proton (with mass mp) which is streaming into the shock with the shock velocity
(u,). Any particle which has an energy significantly above that of the incoming protons
(Ampvg) will not be strongly deflected in crossing the shock front.

These statements concerning the magnitude of the magnetic field and electric potentials
within the shock are in accordance both with the theoretical discussion by Tidman & Krall
(1971) and with satellite measurements of the Earth’s bow shock (Formisano 1974). The
latter show that the thickness of the shock transition (a few hundred kilometres) is much
less than the gyroradius (a few thousand kilometres) of a proton with energy Am ps. Thus it
is probable that a proton with a few times this energy will not be strongly deflected by the
magnetic field as it crosses the shock, nor by the electric potentials as explained above. Such
protons are then available for acceleration: by the mechanism described in Paper I. Protons
with a kinetic energy of “mpuz, the energy of the cold protons convecting into the shock,
must be deflected since, by definition, a shock entails an abrupt change in the bulk velocity
of the instreaming gas. The deflection is probably then due to the electric fields (b).

An indication of how many protons are accelerated by a shock front to an energy of a
few times AMpvs can be obtained from observations of the Earth’s bow shock. The velocity

© Royal Astronomical Society * Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System

S107 ‘OZ Aqng Uo AZoouyoaT, Jo aMTsUT eTUIOFIT[eD ye /310' s[eumnolpsofxo seruUT//:dyYy WoT pepeopUMod
The acceleration of cosmic rays — IT 445

of the incoming plasma in this case is about 400 km/s and its Mach number is about 8 (Volk
1970). Large numbers of protons are found to be accelerated to about 4(4%mpvg)
(Ashbridge, Bame & Strong 1968). The number density of these suprathermal protons up-
stream of the shock is sometimes 10 per cent of the number density of the solar wind
protons convecting into the shock, but it is more often ~1 per cent or less. This implies that
about one in a hundred of the solar wind protons convecting into the shock are accelerated
to 4(Ympvs), although this proportion depends also on the degree to which these protons
are trapped in the region near the shock. These protons are then sufficiently energetic for
them to pass through the shock ‘undeflected’ if they encounter it subsequently.

It is probable that the thickness of shock fronts with much higher velocities and Mach
numbers, such as occur in supernova remnants for example, is less than the gyroradius of
the downstream thermal protons (Tidman & Krall 1971) and so protons with energies a few
times ’mpvg will also pass through such shocks unhindered. It is not known whether the ;
proportion of incoming protons accelerated to this energy is the same for these shocks as it
is for the Earth’s bow shock, but I here assume this to be the case and use the above
measurements to estimate the proportion of protons overtaken by a shock which are
injected into the acceleration process of Paper I. In Section 4 this estimate will be used to
calculate the number of high-energy cosmic rays generated by a shock front.

2.2 ELECTRONS

The situation concerning the injection of electrons is even less clear than it is for protons
since the gyroradius of an electron with a given energy is smaller by the factor (m,/mp)"””
than that of a proton with the same energy. The thickness of a shock must therefore be
correspondingly smaller for an electron not to be strongly deflected in crossing it. In the
case of the Earth’s bow shock, the width of the magnetic transition is typically a few times
the gyroradius (100km) in a solar-wind magnetic field of 10°°G of an electron with energy
Yampvz, the characteristic thermal energy of the post-shock electrons. Thus electrons must
have initial energies > 4m vz if the acceleration mechanism of Paper I is to be effective.
Shocks of very high Mach number, however, may be purely electrostatic (Volk 1970) with
a thickness of the order of a Debye length (Tidman & Krall 1971), which is much less than
the gyroradius of a post-shock thermal electron. If this is so then electrons with energies
a few times 4mpu; will be susceptible to further acceleration, as are the protons.

Observations of the Earth’s bow shock point to the production of electrons with energies
of up to 100(4%mpvs) (Anderson 1969). The proportion of electrons convected into the
shock which are reflected upstream with energies greater than “mpu; can be in excess of
1 in 30 (Scarf et al. 1971).

2.3 SCALE LENGTHS

In Paper I, an expression was derived for the scale length (x9) for the occurrence of Alfvén
waves and energetic particles upstream. of the shock. If the radius of curvature of the shock
is less than Lorit = Xo(v/Ug) (where v is the particle velocity), then the probability of return
of an upstream energetic particle is reduced and the efficiency of acceleration is also
reduced. This is important in the case of the Earth’s bow shock which has a radius of curva-
ture of about 9x 107m. For the observed densities of suprathermal protons with energies a
few times 4mpv2, the value of Lit is ~107m. At higher proton energies the value of Lrit is
much increased because of the lower number density and higher velocity. Acceleration will
thus occur at the Earth’s bow shock only for protons of the lowest energy. Electrons with

© Royal Astronomical Society * Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System

S107 ‘OZ Aqng Uo AZoouyoaT, Jo aMTsUT eTUIOFIT[eD ye /310' s[eumnolpsofxo seruUT//:dyYy WoT pepeopUMod
446 A. R. Bell

similar energies have velocities which are (my/me)" ? larger than those of the protons, so the
acceleration of even low-energy electrons is unlikely.

A similar problem occurs if the magnetic field changes direction on scales of the order of
Lerit Or less. In such cases the equations of Paper I do not apply. In particular, magnetic
mirrors may convect through the shock, sweeping away energetic particles and thus prevent-
ing further acceleration.

3 Acceleration of non-relativistic particles and the resulting energy spectrum

It is interesting to calculate the proportion of particles injected with energies a few times
Ympvs which are accelerated to cosmic ray energies (in excess of 1GeV). In Paper I, I
derived the energy spectrum for relativistic particles, and the derivation is here extended to
the non-relativistic regime in which the calculation is more complicated, owing to the energy
dependence of the probability of return of a particle entering the downstream region, and
the fractional energy increase of a particle as it crosses and recrosses the shock front. Low-
energy protons have velocities which are not much larger than the shock velocity, thus
making non-negligible the terms of order v,/v which were neglected in Paper I. However, the
inclusion of these terms would greatly add to the complexity of the derivation, and the
errors resulting from their neglect are small compared with the uncertainties in the injection
of particles for acceleration. Consequently they are neglected here also and this results in
a small error in the energy spectrum for protons with velocities not much greater than ug.
The energy spectrum of electrons is much less affected because of their higher velocity. The
notation used is that adopted in Paper I.

From equation (3) of Paper I, the fraction of particles which escape during one cycle of
crossing and recrossing the shock is n= 4u,/v. In calculating the energy gained by the
particles, it is assumed that all particles with a particular kinetic energy T = (y — 1) mc? have
their energy increased by the average amount AT in one cycle of crossing and recrossing the
shock. An argument equivalent to that used in Paper I — equations (4)—(7) — but without
the approximation v ~ c, yields

4 v(u; — U2)

AT=(T+Ex) > a (1)

where Ep = mc’ is the particle’s rest mass energy. This equation for AT neglects terms which
are of order v,/v. If Ny(T) is the number of particles accelerated to a kinetic energy of least T
(ic. Ny is the integrated energy spectrum), then the number of particles (Aj) which escape
in one cycle is

AN, = N,(T) 4u3/v. (2)

Equations (1) and (2) can now be combined in differential form by assuming that A7/T and
AN,/N, are both small (which is true if v > v,):

aN; _ NM 3c? U2 (3)
aT (T+ Ep) v? uy—u
This can now be integrated to yield the integrated energy spectrum
T?+2E pT 7 4-9?
mr)= |S, (4)
To+ 2ERTo

© Royal Astronomical Society * Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System

S107 ‘OZ Aqng Uo AZoouyoaT, Jo aMTsUT eTUIOFIT[eD ye /310' s[eumnolpsofxo seruUT//:dyYy WoT pepeopUMod
The acceleration of cosmic rays — IT 447

logN

protons

0 2 4 log T }
MeV
Figure 1. The energy spectra of protons and electrons injected at an energy T, =10 keV.

where wu is defined as in Paper I, and 79 is the kinetic energy of the injected particles. This
expression is normalized so that Nj(T) =1, i.e. one particle is injected. The corresponding
differential energy spectrum is

N(T) = (u— I(T3 + 2ERTo)¢~Y/7(T + Eg)(T? + 2TER) YTD, (5)

The energy spectra for protons and electrons are plotted in Fig. 1 for the case when the
injection energy Jo is 10keV, which is equivalent to a shock velocity of 700km/s if
To = 4(Amyvz). At relativistic energies (T > Ep) this reduces to

N(T) = (w— 1(T3 + 2E RT)“ ~ YD? 1, (6)

an expression which applies closely to electrons, but is in error by a numerical factor of at
most 3 for protons, on account of the approximations made at low energies. Inspection of
Fig. 1 reveals the following:

(a) The energy spectrum is flatter for non-relativistic energies than for relativistic
energies. In the non-relativistic regime N(T) « T~“*)/”. If the relativistic spectral index (u)
is 2.5, then the non-relativistic spectral index is 1.75. The acceleration is thus more efficient
for non-relativistic energies.

(b) As a result of the difference in their rest mass energies, the proton spectrum is flatter
than the electron spectrum for kinetic energies in the range mc? to myc”. This implies that,
for equal numbers of electrons and protons injected at the same energy (<1GeV), the
proton density at higher energies (> 1 GeV) is much greater than the electron density. The
proton density exceeds the electron density by a factor

[(To + 2mpc?)/(T> + 2mec?)] HY.

For To <2m,c’, this factor reduced to (mp/m.)“~1/? = 280 if w=2.5. The condition
Ty < 2m.c? is equivalent to requiring that the shock velocity is much less than 7000 km/s if
the injection energy is 4(4mpvg). The velocities occurring in supernova explosions are of the
order of 10000km/s, and the injection of equal numbers of protons and electrons at the
resulting shock front gives rise to a proton to electron ratio of about 100 at energies greatly

© Royal Astronomical Society * Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System

S107 ‘OZ Aqng Uo AZoouyoaT, Jo aMTsUT eTUIOFIT[eD ye /310' s[eumnolpsofxo seruUT//:dyYy WoT pepeopUMod
448 A. R. Bell

Table 1.
Ty v* Up Ue Up/Ue Np/Ne 10° Up
(keV) (km/s) (MeV) (MeV) (at 100 GeV) yy, pe
1 219 0.191 0.027 7.16 274 7.64
10°° 389 0.451 0.061 7.39 273 5.70
10! 692 1.06 0.138 7.70 272 4.25
10° 1 230 2.49 0.308 8.11 268 3.15
10? 2190 5.84 0.683 8.55 255 2.34
107° 3890 13.6 1.553 8.76 224 1.72
10° 6920 31.5 3.810 8.28 164 1.26
10° 12300 72.5 10.43 6.95 95 0.92
104 21 900 164.8 30.99 §.32 46 0.66

* Defined by T, = 4(4mpvg).

in excess of 1GeV. This ratio is close to that observed for cosmic rays arriving at the Earth
(e.g. Meyer 1969).

(c) Despite the large proton to electron ratio at high energies, the total kinetic energy of
the protons and electrons is more nearly equal since the major contribution comes from
particles with low energies. The proton to electron ratio, and the average energies per elec-
tron (U,) and proton (U,) injected, are tabulated for different injection energies (i.e.
different shock velocities) in Table 1.

4 High-energy cosmic rays
4.1 DENSITIES OF PROTONS AND ELECTRONS

If, in passing through a shock front, a fraction ¢, of the protons in a gas are pre-accelerated
to an energy Vp(4mpu;) at which they are injected into the acceleration mechanism of Paper
I, then the density of high-energy protons in the post-shock gas is given (equation (6)) by

(u—1)/2
yo re (7)

) Wpus
N(T) = bpn(u — D(Wpmeu2c?)4—Y? ( + 42

where x is the post-shock hydrogen density. If 4 = 2.5, this may be expressed as

NpT) 235 em 3) \4 10*km/s! \Gev) ™ SY > (8)

where the values 10? for dp and 4 for Wp are those found for the Earth’s bow shock
(Section 2), and where it is assumed that WV pd3/4c? <1. This may be compared with a typical
density of cosmic rays in the interstellar medium of 3 x 10°*(7/GeV) *5m > GeV | (Wentzel
1974). For each proton overtaken by the shock front, an energy Up is given to protons with
an energy greater than (4m uz). Hence a fraction ¢),U,/%mpv; of the kinetic streaming
energy of the gas flowing into the shock is given to high-energy protons. This fraction, listed
in Table 1 for $) = 10°? and Wp =4, is found to be greater than unity, indicating that the
injection rate must be less than 10°. It is clear, nevertheless, that this acceleration process
can generate large cosmic ray densities.

As was discussed in Section 2, the energy of injection and the number injected are less
easy to ascertain for electrons than for protons. However, since observations of the Earth’s
bow shock show that the numbers of electrons and protons generated at an energy of a few
times 4mpv? are roughly comparable and, since the assumption of equal proton and elec-

© Royal Astronomical Society * Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System

S107 ‘OZ Aqng Uo AZoouyoaT, Jo aMTsUT eTUIOFIT[eD ye /310' s[eumnolpsofxo seruUT//:dyYy WoT pepeopUMod
The acceleration of cosmic rays — IT 449

tron injection rates leads to a proton to electron ratio at high energies close to that observed,
I shall proceed on the assumption that their injection rates are indeed comparable and take
bp and ¢. = 10°° with injection energies of 4(Ampuz) (Wp = Ve = 4).

The electron energy spectrum at energies > mc? is

2\(u—1)/2
Vey,
e p ‘)

T*, 9
4m.c? 0°)

Ne(T) = den(u — I(Wempmrze?)#— 0? (

which can be recast in the form

N.(T) = 0.0838(1 46x 10°34" (#5) (4) "(Ae (2)
10°3/\ 4 cm ?/4 1.5 / \10*km/s

wv Uv 24(u—1/2 T — Me
x [ + (=)(—— ) (—) m™? GeV. (10)
4 /\7000 km/s GeV

4.2 FLUX DENSITIES OF RADIO SOURCES

Energetic electrons gyrate under the influence of a magnetic field and produce synchrotron
radio emission, the intensity of which can be calculated from the formulae given by
Ginzburg & Syrovatskii (1965). The radio emissivity of a shocked gas is

e(¥) = 2.94 x 10°4(1.435 x 105)" E(2a + 1) (5) ( <3) (**)" (=)

where B is the magnetic field in the emitting region, a = 4(u — 1) is the spectral index of the
radio emission, and &(u) is a weak function of u which is unity when u = 2.5. E(u) = 11.7a(u)
where a(t) is the function tabulated by Ginzburg & Syrovatskii. The emissivity («uf if
vs 2 7000 km/s) is strongly dependent on the shock velocity and the radio spectral index.
Supernova remnants are an example of a type of astrophysical object in which shock
fronts are very important. Supernova explosions eject material into the interstellar medium
at velocities of many thousand km/s (Woltjer 1970). Many cubic parsecs of interstellar gas
are shocked at these high velocities and equation (11) can be used to estimate the flux
density of a supernova remnant if the synchrotron-emitting electrons are accelerated in the
shock which precedes the outflow of ejected material. The calculated flux densities for two
young supernova remnants, Tycho’s SNR (3C 10) and Cas A (3C 461), are given in Table 2,
assuming that ¥.=4 and ¢,=10°°. The expansion of both these remnants is decelerating
(Gull 1973a; Bell 1977), but the flux density is calculated in the approximation of uniform
expansion at the mean velocity deduced from their size and age. Since the number of
hydrogen atoms is conserved when a gas passes through a shock, the value of n can be taken
to be the unshocked interstellar value if the volume of the radio source is taken to be the
total volume swept over by the shock, i.e. the volume of the sphere occupied by the super-
nova remnant. The magnetic field is taken to be 10°°G, a value typical of an interstellar field
compressed in a shock, although the medium in which a supernova explodes may be
disturbed and contain an enhanced magnetic field. In view of the uncertainties in the
distance to Tycho’s SNR, its ambient density and the number of electrons injected into the
acceleration mechanism, there is good agreement between the calculated and observed flux
densities of Tycho’s SNR. This suggests that the radio emission from Tycho’s SNR can be
explained in terms of electrons accelerated at the shock front moving into the interstellar gas.

© Royal Astronomical Society * Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System

S107 ‘OZ Aqng Uo AZoouyoaT, Jo aMTsUT eTUIOFIT[eD ye /310' s[eumnolpsofxo seruUT//:dyYy WoT pepeopUMod
450 A. R. Bell

Table 2.

SNR Tycho Cas A

n(cm”?) 0.20) 2(1,2)

ox 0,6) 0.75)

vg (km/s) 7500 5900,

Observed flux density at 1 GHz (Jy) 60%) 2800)

B(G) 19°33) 107°) 3 x 10-4)

Calculated flux density at 1GHz (Jy) 19 3.2 1200
electrons 1 x 10% 8 x 107!

Energy (nf stecirons and protons 1 x 10%? 7x 10%
shocked gas 2x 10° 3x 10%

1. Gull (1973a).

2. McKee (1974).

3. This is a typical value for the compressed interstellar magnetic field.

4. The magnetic field assuming equipartition of energy between the magnetic field and relati-

vistic electrons.
. van den Bergh (1971).
6. Woltjer (1972).

.o A)

In Cas A, however, the observed and calculated flux densities differ by three orders of
magnitude if the magnetic field is 10°°G. A possible reason for this is that the magnetic field
in Cas A has been amplified by differential motions within the shell, resulting either from
Rayleigh—Taylor instabilities (Gull 1973b), or from the passage of the fast-moving optical
knots through the radio shell (Bell 1977). Indeed, the magnetic field in the compact radio
peaks of Cas A must be much larger than 10°°G or else their internal pressure due to
synchrotron electrons is impossibly high (Bell 1977). If the magnetic field is instead set to
the value (3x 10*G) deduced by assuming equipartition between the energy in magnetic
field and relativistic electrons, then the calculated flux density is 900 Jy, in better agreement
with the observed value. The fast knots may also contribute to the radio emission by
shocking the radio shell as they pass through it, thus accelerating more particles to high
energies, and this may be related to the ‘blobby’ nature of the radio emission.

There is no evidence that the shell of Tycho’s SNR is being intersected by fast-moving
knots which could increase the radio emission, but it is probable that its shell was subject
to the Rayleigh—Taylor instability at some time in the past, resulting in an increased
magnetic field which may still persist. The calculated flux density in Table 2 is then too low.

Table 2 also gives the total energy of the accelerated electrons with energies greater than
To, and the total energy of the electrons and protons under the assumption that equal
numbers of each are injected. The energy of the accelerated particles is a substantial fraction
of the total energy given to the shocked interstellar gas (Yszm uy per baryon in the case of
compression by a factor 4 at the shock front) under the crude assumption of uniform
expansion. The large proportion of this energy which is given to the accelerated particles is a
consequence of the high value of ¢, (107°). The total energy of the particles is also a large
fraction of the total energy released in a supernova explosion, 10“—10*°J (e.g. Ginzburg &
Syrovatskii 1964).

5 Calculations of the minimum energy in radio sources

A common calculation is that of the minimum energy of the magnetic field and relativistic
electrons needed to account for the observed synchrotron emission from a radio source. This
calculation usually takes account only of those electrons which radiate at frequencies higher

© Royal Astronomical Society * Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System

S107 ‘OZ Aqng Uo AZoouyoaT, Jo aMTsUT eTUIOFIT[eD ye /310' s[eumnolpsofxo seruUT//:dyYy WoT pepeopUMod
The acceleration of cosmic rays — II 451

than the low-frequency cut-off to the radio spectrum, neglecting both electrons of lower
energy and also energetic protons. If, in reality, the energy spectrum of the electrons extends
down to much lower energies as given by equation (5), then the minimum energy must be
increased. In Cas A, these extra electrons increase the minimum energy by a factor of 2.5. If
protons are injected into the acceleration process in equal numbers to the electrons, the
minimum energy is increased by a further factor of 3.2, making 8.0 in total which is com-
parable with the factor of 13.9 by which the minimum energy is increased if the low-energy
particles are neglected but protons are assumed to outnumber the electrons at all energies by
100 to 1. The large energy densities of the magnetic field and fast particles are an
outstanding feature of non-thermal radio sources in general, and these considerations imply
even higher energy densities.

6 Effect of a shock front on pre-existing cosmic rays

In previous sections the injection of particles into the acceleration mechanism has been
considered as taking place at low energies, due to the existence of a ‘high-energy’ tail in the
velocity distribution of the particles emerging from the shock front. An alternative source
for the injection of particles is the cosmic ray population which already exists in the up-
stream gas. Since cosmic rays are thought to fill the Galaxy, any shock front moving into the
interstellar gas will encounter these cosmic rays and accelerate them to even higher energies.
The differential energy spectrum R,(T) which results can be obtained from the integral

R(T) = | ” dZ P(Z) O(T, 2), (12)
0

where P(Z) is the energy spectrum of the cosmic rays before they were shocked, and Q(T, Z)
is the energy spectrum resulting from the acceleration of particles which are injected mono-
energetically with an energy Z. Q(T, Z) is given by equation (5):

QO when 7T<Z

13
(u —1)(Z?2 + 2ERZ)\Y YP (T + Ey T? + 2TER) “YY? when T>Z. (13)

ovr, 2) =|

If the previously existing cosmic rays resulted from the acceleration at an earlier shock of
particles injected at the low energy To, then A(T) = N(T) (equation (5)) for T >To and
P(T) = 0 for T < To. The integral in equation (12) can now be evaluated. Indeed it is possible
to derive a more general function R,,(T) which is the energy spectrum of particles originally
accelerated in a shock front, giving the energy spectrum P(T), but which have subsequently
passed through a further n shocks. R,(T) is thus the energy spectrum resulting from the
passage of a gas through a total of (7 +1) shocks. Only those particles injected at low
energies in the first shock are considered, and those injected in the subsequent shocks are
neglected (see (c) below). R,(T) is the energy probability distribution of one particle and is
defined by

a

Ryl)= [dz Ry(Z) OUT, 2) 4)

The general form of R,,(T) in the range T > To is
R,(T) = (T§ + 2ToER)O YP (T+ Ep \(T? + 2TER) YP.

(u—1)"*! [in( T? + 27Ee. |" nn

2"n! T24+2T ER

© Royal Astronomical Society * Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System

S107 ‘OZ Aqng Uo AZoouyoaT, Jo aMTsUT eTUIOFIT[eD ye /310' s[eumnolpsofxo seruUT//:dyYy WoT pepeopUMod
452 A. R. Bell

log R,
0
-5
-10 n=3
n=2
n=1
n=0
0 2 4 log/_T_'
ool

Figure 2. The energy spectra of electrons accelerated in an initial shock and which have passed through n
subsequent shocks.

This function is plotted in Fig. 2 for electrons initially injected with an energy Ty) = 10 keV.
The effect of multiple shocks on the number and average energy of protons and electrons
is given in Table 3. The following points should be noted:

(a) At energies typical of electrons which emit radio waves, the energy spectrum flattens
with succeeding shocks. Consequently the spectrum of radio emission also flattens.

(b) The expression for R,(T7) is independent of the shock velocities, except for that of
the initial shock, provided that the velocities of the subsequent shocks are less than that of
the initial shock. The velocity of the initial shock determines To.

(c) For sufficiently high energies, R,,(T)/Rn_1(T) is considerably greater than 2. This
implies that particles injected at the initial shock and subsequently accelerated to higher
energies outnumber the particles injected at low energies in each of the subsequent shocks.

The further acceleration of cosmic rays may be important in the case of low-velocity
shock fronts. In such shocks the number of particles injected at low energies which are
accelerated to high energies is small, on account of its strong dependence on the shock
velocity — equations (7) and (9). This may be relevant to old supernova remnants such as the
Cygnus Loop in which the shock velocity is only a few hundred kilometres per second
(Woltjer 1972). Van der Laan (1962) suggested that the radio emission is due to the com-
pression of the interstellar magnetic field and cosmic rays in the region of strong cooling
which occurs behind a radiative shock front. The present discussion indicates that further
acceleration of the interstellar cosmic rays takes place at the shock front, resulting in a
cosmic ray density which is greater than that given merely by adiabatic compression. It is
also possible that the shocked gas is subjected to further shocks while being compressed
(Falle 1975), thus increasing the cosmic ray density yet again. The increase in the energy of
the particles implies an increased pressure which will restrict the compression of the gas.
The resulting energy spectrum can be expected to be flatter than that of the ambient inter-
stellar cosmic rays.

A gas containing cosmic rays which passes through a shock front such as that of an old
supernova remnant, and then at a later time re-expands adiabatically to its original volume,
has the energy of its cosmic rays increased. A highly relativistic cosmic ray has its energy

© Royal Astronomical Society * Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System

S107 ‘OZ Aqng Uo AZoouyoaT, Jo aMTsUT eTUIOFIT[eD ye /310' s[eumnolpsofxo seruUT//:dyYy WoT pepeopUMod
Downloaded from http://mnras.oxfordjournals.org/ at California Institute of Technology on July 20, 2015

453

5
) ‘(Satue,)p =z Aq poured ,
aA
S 6'06€ S°8ST ver 06 L'vtl 6'T80E €
° £88 €8P 07 Vol GLE 5898 z
= eel 8°6 v9 L'8? ETI 6°70Z I
iS OT OT oT ers T8°€ STE 0 0769 <OT
> zwst9 1887 PO! rLt L'9@ yeLs €
= roll a 9°9€ 6°87 98 ZS@Z z
s SST Oz! 98 V8p E97 0'9r I
Ss OT oT or 8°6L €89°0 3's 0 061z 201
8 L'vs8 TLEp S81 EE SL S LET €
8 Lvl 1'S6 ses 8'Se tr'z LSS 4
<= wLI BT €01 zss 999°0 66'6 I
oT oT oT 68 810 90° 0 769 101
Z6EIT 9°€79 9 €6% SZ EE? v9 €
T08T S0c1 6TL SOP 0L9°0 eel z
06! SST wal 88S Z9T'0 orz I
oT oT oT s°S8 L70°0 1610 0 612 001
A2) [78 suodooya
APD 0T=L APD T=L A2DT0=.. 0} Suojo3d Jo (A?) (A2N) (u) syooys (s/w) (A2%)
(2) u/CL)4Y suonoes[e Jo Jaquinu ur eseveroUy ones Jaquinn 7) dn jo Jaquiny Pas °F
"€ 1981

'Ge77 C8 SVUNW8/6L ,

© Royal Astronomical Society * Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
454 A. R. Bell

increased on average by a factor of 3u2/(4u2 —u,) when overtaken by a shock, and this is
greater than the increase of (u,/u2)'’? which is obtained purely by adiabatic compression.
Hence the average increase in energy is greater than the average decrease which takes place
in the subsequent adiabatic expansion, and this is also true for energetic particles which are
not highly relativistic. Consequently, energy is given to the cosmic ray gas. Some of the
particle energy is lost to the Alfvén waves which confined the particles near the shock, and
this results in a steeper energy spectrum of the accelerated particles which is entirely
accounted for by the appearance of the terms 1/M, in the expression for the spectral index
of the differential energy spectrum given in equation (12) of Paper I. This energy loss is
small for strong shocks.

7 Conclusions

Consideration of the theory of shock fronts and the results from satellite observations of the
Earth’s bow shock indicates that electrons and protons are produced by a shock at energies
such that the particles can be accelerated to high energies by the process described in Paper
I, thus producing large numbers of cosmic rays. The quantities of protons and electrons in-
jected into the acceleration mechanism are estimated and the non-relativistic energy spec-
trum calculated, and these together give an estimate of the high-energy cosmic ray density
in a shocked gas.
The following approximations and assumptions have been made:

(a) Protons and electrons with an energy of 4(4mpu;) are able to pass through a shock of
very high Mach number without large deflection, and are therefore injected into the accelera-
tion process (Section 2).

(b) The proportion of incoming protons (¢,) and electrons (¢,) which are injected with
energy 4(4mpu;) is 10°? in both cases (Section 4).

(c) The terms of order v,/v are neglected in the calculation of non-relativistic energy
spectrum and the approximation is made that AN;/N; and AT7/T are small. This leads to an
error in the proton energy spectrum but the error is small compared with the uncertainties
in the number of protons injected (Section 3).

These assumptions and approximations yield expressions for the cosmic ray density in a
shocked gas, and the cosmic ray electron density can be used to predict the intensity of
radio emission from the gas. Application of the calculations to a crude model of Tycho’s
supernova remnant in which the magnetic field is taken to be the interstellar field com-
pressed in a shock gives a predicted flux density consistent with the observed value. In the
case of Cas A, agreement between the predicted and observed flux densities is obtained if
the magnetic field is much greater than the compressed interstellar value as has already been
implied by previous work on this object.

The further acceleration in a shock front of pre-existing cosmic rays may be important in
relatively slow shock fronts such as occur in old supernova remnants.

Acknowledgments
I am grateful to Dr P. A. G. Scheuer for his help and encouragement in this work, and to

Dr J. R. Shakeshaft, Dr S. F. Gull and the referee for helpful comments on the manuscript.
I acknowledge the support of an SRC studentship.

© Royal Astronomical Society * Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System

S107 ‘OZ Aqng Uo AZoouyoaT, Jo aMTsUT eTUIOFIT[eD ye /310' s[eumnolpsofxo seruUT//:dyYy WoT pepeopUMod
The acceleration of cosmic rays — II 455
References

Anderson, K. A., 1969. J. geophys. Res., 74,95.

Ashbridge, J. R., Bame, S. J. & Strong, I. B., 1968. J. geophys. Res., 73,5777.

Bell, A. R.. 1977. Mon. Not. R. astr. Soc., 179, 573.

Bell, A. R., 1978. Mon. Not. R. astr. Soc., 182, 147.

Falle, S. A. E. G., 1975. Mon. Not. R. astr. Soc., 172, 55.

Formisano, V., 1974. Correlated interplanetary and magnetospheric observations, ed. Page, D. E.,
D. Reidel Publ. Co.

Ginzburg, V. L. & Syrovatskii, S. I., 1964. The origin of cosmic rays, Pergamon Press.

Ginzburg, V. L. & Syrovatskii, S. I., 1965. A. Rev. Astr. Astrophys., 3, 297.

Gull, S. F., 1973a. Mon. Not. R. astr. Soc., 162, 135.

Gull, S. F., 1973b. Mon. Not. R. astr. Soc., 161, 47.

McKee, C. F., 1974. Astrophys. J., 188, 335.

Meyer, P., 1969. A. Rev. Astr. Astrophys., 7,1.

Scarf, F. L., Fredericks, R. W., Frank, L. A. & Neugebauer, M., 1971. J. geophys. Res., 76, 5162.

Tidman, D. A. & Krall, N. A., 1971. Shock waves in collisionless plasmas, Wiley Interscience.

van den Bergh, S., 1971. Astrophys. J., 165, 457.

van der Laan, H., 1962. Mon. Not. R. astr. Soc., 124, 125.

Volk, H., 1970. Chapter Collisionless shocks, in Physics of hot plasmas, ed. Rye, B. J. & Taylor, J. C.,
Plenum Press.

Wentzel, D. G., 1974. A. Rev. Astr. Astrophys., 12,71.

Woltjer, L., 1970. AU Symp. 39, p. 229, D. Reidel Publ. Co.

Woltjer, L., 1972. A. Rev. Astr. Astrophys., 10, 33.

© Royal Astronomical Society * Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System

ST07~ “07 Aqne uo ASojouysI |, JO ayNITSU] eIUIOFITeD 3e /810° syeuIno[p1ojXo' seruU//:dqqy WO} popero[UMod
