arXiv:1101.4256v1 [astro-ph.HE] 22 Jan 2011                               Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys 2010 49 1056-8700/97/0610-00

                                                            The Astrophysics of Ultrahigh
                                                            Energy Cosmic Rays

                                                                             Kumiko Kotera and Angela V. Olinto
                                                                                 Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics,
                                                                                 Kavli Institute for Cosmological Physics,
                                                                                 The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA

                                             Key Words
                                             cosmic accelerators, magnetic fields, particle astrophysics, neutrinos, gamma-rays, compact
                                             objects, active galaxies, cosmic background radiation, gamma-ray bursts

                                             Abstract
                                             The origin of the highest energy cosmic rays is still unknown. The discovery of their sources
                                             will reveal the workings of the most energetic astrophysical accelerators in the universe. Cur-
                                             rent observations show a spectrum consistent with an origin in extragalactic astrophysical
                                             sources. Candidate sources range from the birth of compact objects to explosions related to
                                             gamma-ray bursts or to events in active galaxies. We discuss the main effects of propagation
                                             from cosmologically distant sources including interactions with cosmic background radia-
                                             tion and magnetic fields. We examine possible acceleration mechanisms leading to a survey
                                             of candidate sources and their signatures. New questions arise from an observed hint of sky
                                             anisotropies and an unexpected evolution of composition indicators. Future observations
                                             may reach the necessary sensitivity to achieve charged particle astronomy and to observe
                                             ultrahigh energy photons and neutrinos, which will further illuminate the workings of the
                                             universe at these extreme energies. In addition to fostering a new understanding of high-
                                             energy astrophysical phenomena, the study of ultrahigh energy cosmic rays can constrain
                                             the structure of the Galactic and extragalactic magnetic fields as well as probe particle
                                             interactions at energies orders of magnitude higher than achieved in terrestrial accelerators.

                                             1 Introduction
                                             The observation that cosmic rays can exceed 1020 eV poses some interesting and challenging
                                             questions: Where do they come from? How can they be accelerated to such high energies?
                                             What kind of particles are they? What is the spatial distribution of their sources? What do
                                             they tell us about these extreme cosmic accelerators? How strong are the magnetic fields
                                             that they traverse on their way to Earth? How do they interact with the cosmic background

                                                                                                                                                                            1
      Figure 1:
      All particle cosmic ray flux multiplied by E2 observed by ATIC (Ahn et al. 2008), Proton
      (Grigorov et al. 1971), RUNJOB (Apanasenko et al. 2001), Tibet AS- (Chen 2008), KASCADE
      (Kampert et al. 2004), KASCADE-Grande (Apel et al. 2009), HiRes-I (Abbasi et al. 2009),
      HiRes-II (Abbasi et al. 2008b), and Auger (Abraham et al. 2010b). LHC energy reach of p - p
      collisions (in the frame of a proton) is indicated for comparison.

     radiation? What secondary particles are produced from these interactions? What can we
     learn about particle interactions at these otherwise inaccessible energies? Here we review
     recent progress towards answering these questions.

        The dominant component of cosmic rays observed on Earth originate in the Galaxy. As
     shown in Figure 1, the study of this striking non-thermal spectrum requires a large number
     of instruments to cover over 8 orders of magnitude in energy and 24 in flux. Galactic
     cosmic rays are likely to originate in supernova remnants (see, e.g., Hillas 2006, for a recent
     update on the origin of Galactic cosmic rays). A transition from Galactic to extragalactic
     cosmic rays should occur somewhere between 1 PeV ( 1015 eV) and 1 EeV ( 1018 eV).
     Progress on determining this transition relies both on the study of the highest energies
     reached in Galactic accelerators as well as the search for extragalactic accelerators that
     produce ultrahigh energy cosmic rays (UHECRs).

        We begin with a brief summary of recent observations (Section 2), which reveal a spec-

2 Kotera & Olinto
Figure 2:
Spectrum of UHECRs multiplied by E3 observed by HiRes I (Abbasi et al. 2009) and Auger
(Abraham et al. 2010b). Overlaid are simulated spectra obtained for different models of the
Galactic to extragalactic transition and different injected chemical compositions and spectral
indices, s, described in Section 2.1 and 4.

trum whose shape supports the long-held notion that sources of UHECRs are extragalactic.
As shown in Figure 2, the crucial spectral feature recently established at the highest ener-
gies is a steep decline in flux above about 30 EeV. This feature is reminiscent of the effect of
interactions between extragalactic cosmic rays and the cosmic background radiation, named
the Greisen-Zatsepin-Kuzmin (GZK) cutoff (Greisen 1966; Zatsepin & Kuzmin 1966). An-
other important feature shown in Figure 2 is the hardening of the spectrum at a few EeV,
called the ankle, which may be caused by the transition from Galactic to extragalactic
cosmic rays or by propagation losses if UHECRs are mostly protons.

   As discussed in Section 2, recent reports of a trend toward a heavier composition from
a few EeV up to 40 EeV together with hints of anisotropies in the sky distribution above
60 EeV raise new and unexpected puzzles. An anisotropic sky distribution is expected for
trans-GZK energies (i.e., energies above 60 EeV), if UHECRs are mainly protons, due to
a combination of the GZK effect (which limits trans-GZK observed sources to lie within a
few 100 Mpc), the anisotropic distribution of source bearing galaxies on 100 Mpc scales,

                                                                                        Astrophysics of UHECRs 3
     and the low magnetic deflection of light trans-GZK nuclei by the Galactic and extragalactic
     magnetic fields. Therefore, the report of correlations between UHECRs above 55 EeV and
     the distribution of nearby active galaxies (Abraham et al. 2007) can be simply interpreted as
     protons from nearby sources within the so-called GZK sphere. However, composition indi-
     cators from shower development observations argue for a transition to a heavier component
     from a few EeV up to 40 EeV (Abraham et al. 2010a). Heavy nuclei dominated injection
     models are quite rare in the astrophysical literature of candidate sources (see Section 6)
     and if iron is the main component at the highest energies, Galactic magnetic fields should
     wash out most anisotropic patterns around 60 EeV. Another possible interpretation of the
     observed shower development properties is a change in hadronic interactions above 100 TeV
     center of mass (TeV  1012 eV), an order of magnitude higher energy than will be reached
     by the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN. A new puzzle is born: an injection at the
     source dominated by heavy nuclei is astrophysically unexpected, while significant changes
     in hadronic interactions represent novel particle physics.

        To help discriminate between possible interpretations of recent results, we review in
     Section 3 the well-known physics of the propagation of ultrahigh energy cosmic rays: their
     interaction with the cosmic background radiation and the effect of cosmic magnetic fields.
     The effect of propagation on the observed spectrum, sky distribution, and composition
     depends on the source redshift evolution, the injected spectrum and composition, and the
     evolution of cosmic backgrounds and magnetic fields. The spectrum is cut-off due to photo-
     pion production of protons and photo-dissociation of nuclei off cosmic backgrounds. The
     composition simplifies to either proton or iron (or a mixture of the two) at trans-GZK
     energies. Anisotropies in the sky distribution of sources are blurred by magnetic fields
     for heavier primaries while protons keep most of the original anisotropies at trans-GZK
     energies.

        Different scenarios for the transition between cosmic rays created in the Galaxy and those
     from extragalactic sources are discussed in Section 4. Specific acceleration mechanisms
     envisioned for reaching these extremely high energies are the topic of Section 5, including
     shock acceleration, unipolar inductors, and other proposals. In Section 6, we survey known
     astrophysical sites that are reasonable candidates for UHECR sources, from compact objects
     such as, neutron stars (or magnetars), to gamma-ray bursts and active galaxies. Possible
     signatures of different candidate sources are discussed in light of future observations of
     UHECRs and other messengers of the extreme universe.

        With a significant increase in the integrated exposure to cosmic rays above 60 EeV, next
     generation observatories may reach the sensitivity necessary to achieve charged particle
     astronomy and to observe ultrahigh energy photons and neutrinos, which will further illu-
     minate the workings of the universe at the most extreme energies. We end with the ongoing
     and future search plans for the cosmic sources of ultrahigh energy particles.

        Due to the limited space, we refer readers interested in details of observational techniques
     to Letessier-Selvon & Stanev (2011), Beatty & Westerhoff (2009), Bluemer et al. (2009),
     and Nagano & Watson (2000). Previous reviews on the astrophysics of UHECRs can be
     found in Cronin (2005), Olinto (2000), Berezinsky et al. (1990b), and Hillas (2006, 1984),
     while Bhattacharjee & Sigl (2000) also include a survey of UHECRs from cosmological

4 Kotera & Olinto
Figure 3:
Evolution of the exposures of past, current, and planned UHECR observatories over time: Fly's
Eye (Baltrusaitis et al. 1985), AGASA (Chiba et al. 1992), HiRes (Boyer et al. 2002), Pierre
Auger Observatory (Abraham et al. 2004), TA (Nonaka et al. 2009; Tokuno et al. 2009).
Projected exposures for Auger North (Blu®mer et al. 2010) if construction start in 2016 and
JEM-EUSO (Takahashi et al. 2009) if launched in 2017 including 20% duty cycle.

relics. Stanev (2010) published a recent monograph on UHECRs while Gaisser (1991) covers
cosmic rays of lower energies. Recent reviews cover the closely related high energy neutrinos
(Anchordoqui & Montaruli 2010) and high energy gamma-rays (Hinton & Hofmann 2009).

2 Cosmic Ray Observations at Ultrahigh Energies
After many decades of efforts to discover the origin of cosmic rays, current observatories
are now reaching the necessary exposure to begin unveiling this longstanding mystery (see
Figure 3 for a the history of exposures for the largest observatories). The first detection of
UHECRs dates back to Linsley (1963), but it was only during the 1990s that an interna-
tional effort began to address these questions with the necessary large-scale observatories.
The largest detectors operating during the 1990s were the Akeno Giant Air Shower Ar-
ray (AGASA), a 100 km2 ground array of scintillators in Japan (Chiba et al. 1992), and
the High Resolution Fly's Eye (HiRes) a pair of fluorescence telescopes that operated in
Utah until 2006 (Boyer et al. 2002). During their lifetimes, AGASA reached an exposure

                                                                                        Astrophysics of UHECRs 5
     of 1.6 ◊ 103 km2 sr yr (or 1,600 L1) while HiRes reached twice that. To date, the highest
     energy recorded event was a 320 EeV fluorescence detection (Bird et al. 1994) by the pioneer
     fluorescence experiment Fly's Eye (Baltrusaitis et al. 1985).

        Completed in 2008, the Pierre Auger Observatory is the largest observatory at present
     (Abraham et al. 2004). Constructed in the province of Mendoza, Argentina, by a collabora-
     tion of 18 countries, it consists of a 3,000 km2 array of water Cherenkov stations with 1.5 km
     spacing in a triangular grid overlooked by four fluorescence telescopes. The combination of
     the two techniques into a hybrid observatory maximizes the precision in the reconstruction
     of air showers, allowing for large statistics with good control of systematics. The largest
     observatory in the northern hemisphere, the Telescope Array (TA), is also hybrid (Nonaka
     et al. 2009; Tokuno et al. 2009). Situated in Utah, it covers 762 km2 with scintillators
     spaced every 1.2 km overlooked by three fluorescence telescopes.

     2.1 Spectrum
     The observed cosmic ray spectrum (Figure 1) can be described by a broken power law, E-s,
     with spectral index s = 2.7 below the knee at  1 PeV (= 1015 eV) and s 3 between the
     knee and the ankle around 3 EeV (Apel et al. 2009). Above the ankle, s 2.6 followed
     by the recently established flux suppression above about 30 EeV. With exposures around
     103L, the measured spectra at energies where the GZK effect was anticipated had conflicting
     results: AGASA reported no flux supression at trans-GZK energies (Takeda et al. 1998),
     while early results from HiRes were consistent with the GZK prediction (Abbasi et al.
     2004). By 2006, HiRes accumulated enough statistics for the first significant observation of
     the GZK suppression (Abbasi et al. 2008b), as displayed in Figure 2. This was confirmed
     by the Auger Observatory (Abraham et al. 2008b) with a recent update starting at 1 EeV
     (Abraham et al. 2010b) and based on 1.3◊104L exposure (shown in Figure 2). The displayed
     error bars are statistical errors while the reported systematic error on the absolute energy
     scale is about 22%. This systematic error allows for overall energy shifts that make the two
     observations consistent within the estimated errors. The highest energy event reported by
     Auger thus far is of 142 EeV (Abreu et al. 2010).

        Figure 2 also shows the observed spectrum fit by different models of UHECR sources
     (taken from Kotera et al. 2010b and references therein). In the mixed composition and
     iron dominated models (Allard et al. 2007), the ankle indicates a transition from Galactic
     to extragalactic cosmic rays (see Section 4), the source evolution is similar to the star
     formation rate (SFR), and the injection spectra are relatively hard (s  2 - 2.1). In the
     proton dominated models in the figure, the ankle is due to pair production propagation
     losses (Berezinsky & Grigorieva 1988), named "dip models" (Berezinsky et al. 2006), and
     the injection spectra are softer for a wide range of evolution models. Models with proton
     primaries can also fit the spectrum with harder injection with a transition from Galactic to
     extragalactic at the ankle (Wibig & Wolfendale 2004).

        The confirmed presence of a spectral feature similar to the predicted GZK cutoff, settles
     the question of whether acceleration in extragalactic sources can explain the high-energy

           1In honor of UHECR pioneer John Linsley, we use the exposure unit L = 1 km2 sr yr.

6 Kotera & Olinto
Figure 4:
Fraction of cosmic rays that survives propagation over a distance > D, for protons above 40, 60,
and 100 EeV and for He, CNO, and Fe above 60 EeV. Black solid line shows where 50% of a given
species can originate for a given atomic mass and energy. At trans-GZK energies (E 60 EeV),
only protons and iron survive the propagation over D 50 Mpc. Adapted from Allard et al.
(2007).

spectrum, ending the need for exotic alternatives designed to avoid the GZK feature. How-
ever, the possibility that the observed softening of the spectrum is mainly due to the maxi-
mum energy of acceleration at the source, Emax, is not as easily dismissed. A confirmation
that the observed softening is the GZK feature, awaits supporting evidence from the spec-
tral shape, anisotropies, and composition at trans-GZK energies and the observation of
produced secondaries such as neutrinos and photons.

2.2 Anisotropies in the Sky Distribution
The landmark measurement of a flux suppression at the highest energies encourages the
search for sources in the nearby extragalactic universe using the arrival directions of trans-
GZK cosmic rays. Above GZK energies, observable sources must lie within about 100
Mpc, the so-called GZK horizon or GZK sphere (Harari et al. 2006; Allard et al. 2007

                                                                                        Astrophysics of UHECRs 7
      Figure 5:

      Arrival directions of cosmic rays with energy E  55 EeV detected by Auger (black dots) in an
      Aitoff-Hammer projection of the sky in Galactic coordinates restricted to |b| > 10 (Abreu et al.
      2010). Shaded areas represent a smoothed density map (5 smoothing angle) of the 2MRS
      galaxies within 200 Mpc over the Auger Observatory field of view.

     and references therein). This effect is shown in Figure 4 where the fraction of cosmic rays
     that arrive on Earth from a given distance is plotted for different energy protons (> 40,
     60, and 100 EeV) and for different nuclei (He, CNO, and Fe) arriving with energies above
     60 EeV. At these trans-GZK energies, light composite nuclei are promptly dissociated by
     cosmic background photons (see Section 3), while protons and iron nuclei may reach us
     from sources at distances up to about 100 Mpc. Since matter is known to be distributed
     inhomogeneously within this distance scale, the cosmic ray arrival directions should exhibit
     an anisotropic distribution above the GZK energy threshold, provided intervening magnetic
     fields are not too strong. At the highest energies, the isotropic diffuse flux from sources far
     beyond this GZK horizon should be strongly suppressed.

        Attempts to detect anisotropies at ultrahigh energies date back to the mid 1990s when
     hints of correlations with the local large scale structure and with distant BL Lacs objects
     were claimed and debated (see Section 6.2). With the increase in the number of observed
     ultrahigh energy events, these early claims have not been substantiated while different
     correlations have been recently reported.

        The most recent discussion of anisotropies in the sky distribution of ultrahigh energy
     events began with the report that the arrival directions of the 27 cosmic rays observed by
     Auger with energies above 57 EeV exhibited a statistically significant correlation with the
     anisotropically distributed galaxies in the 12th VCV (V¥eron-Cetty & V¥eron 2006) catalog
     of active galactic nuclei (AGN) (Abraham et al. 2007, 2008a). The correlation was most
     significant for AGN with redshifts z < 0.018 (distances < 75 Mpc) and within 3.1 separa-
     tion angles. An independent dataset confirmed the anisotropy at a confidence level of over
     99% (Abraham et al. 2007, 2008a). The prescription established by the Auger collabora-
     tion tested the departure from isotropy given the VCV AGN coverage of the sky, not the

8 Kotera & Olinto
hypothesis that the VCV AGN were the actual UHECR sources. In particular, a lack of
events from the Virgo region showed that assuming the VCV AGN to be the sources gives
a bad match to the observed event distribution (Gorbunov et al. 2008). No corresponding
correlation was observed in the northern hemisphere by HiRes (Abbasi et al. 2008c) where
the distribution of their 13 trans-GZK events is consistent with isotropy.

   Figure 5 shows a map of the 69 events used in the recently published Auger update
which includes another 42 trans-GZK events (Abreu et al. 2010). With the new events, the
correlation with the VCV catalog is not as strong for the same parameters as the original
period (20 events correlate out of the original 27 while only 12 correlate out of the new
42). The data after the prescription period shows a departure from isotropy at the 3 level.
With the currently estimated correlation fraction of 38%, a 5 significance will require at
least another four years of Auger observations (Abreu et al. 2010).

   The VCV catalog is not a catalog produced by an instrument or survey strategy, but
an extensive compilation of known AGN in the literature. A better set of catalogs which
give a more homogeneous and statistically complete survey of the nearby universe over the
large field of view of Auger has become recently available. In particular, the Swift-BAT
catalog of AGN (Tueller et al. 2010) and the 2MASS Redshift Survey (2MRS) catalog
of galaxies (Huchra et al. 2005) are two catalogs where correlations may become more
meaningful (George et al. 2008; Abreu et al. 2010). Figure 5 shows the example of Auger
data superimposed on a density map generated with the 22,000 galaxies within 200 Mpc
of the 2MRS catalog (Abreu et al. 2010) with Galactic latitude |b| > 10. The Auger
trans-GZK events tend to align better with the distribution of galaxies in 2MRS (and with
Swift-BAT AGN) than with the isotropic scenario, however a significance of the anisotropy
or a source class identification is hard to access with the current limited statistics (Abreu
et al. 2010).

   Finally, the anisotropy reported by the test with the VCV catalog may indicate the effect
of the large scale structure in the distribution of source harboring galaxies or it may be
due to a nearby source. An interesting possibility is the cluster of Auger events around
the direction of Centaurus A, the closest AGN (at  3.8 Mpc). The clustering around the
Cen A region may also be due to the Centaurus cluster (as shown by the dark red region
of Figure 5) which is much further away but on the general direction of Cen A (Kashti &
Waxman 2008; Kotera & Lemoine 2008b). Only much higher statistics will tell if Cen A is
the first UHECR source to be identified.

2.3 Composition

The third key measurement that can help resolve the mystery behind the origin of UHECRs
is their composition as a function of energy observed on Earth. Composition measurements
can be made directly up to energies of  100 TeV with space-based experiments (see, e.g.,
Ahn et al. 2010). For higher energies, composition is derived from the observed development
and particle content of the extensive airshower created by the primary cosmic ray when it
interacts with the atmosphere.

   Presently, the best indicator of the composition of the primary particle is the depth in the

                                                                                        Astrophysics of UHECRs 9
        Figure 6:

         Xmax and RMS(Xmax) as a function of primary energy, as measured by Auger fluorescence
        detectors (Abraham et al. 2010a). MC simulations from different hadronic interaction models are
        displayed for primary protons (blue) and primary iron nuclei (red).

       atmosphere of the shower maximum, Xmax, given in g/cm2. The average shower maximum,
        Xmax , scales approximately as ln(E/A), where E is the energy and A is the atomic
       mass of the primary cosmic ray which generated the shower (see, e.g., Letessier-Selvon &
       Stanev 2011 and references therein). On average the shower maximum for protons occurs
       deeper in the atmosphere than that for the same energy iron nucleus, Xmax p > Xmax F e .
       In addition, proton showers fluctuate more about Xmax providing another measure of
       composition, for example, the root mean square fluctuations about Xmax . Another useful
       measure of composition is the particle content of the shower such as the number of muons:
       proton showers have fewer muons than showers caused by heavier nuclei with the same
       energy. In practice, observed shower maxima and particle numbers are compared with
       Monte Carlo airshower simulations which involve an extrapolation to higher energies of
       hadronic interactions known at energies of laboratory accelerators ( TeV).

          Observations of shower properties from the knee to just below the ankle indicate a general
       trend from light primaries dominating at the knee to heavier primaries dominating up to
        0.1 EeV (see, e.g., Bluemer et al. 2009). These observations follow expectations that the
       knee is created by a rigidity2 dependent end of Galactic cosmic rays which may be due to

             2Rigidity is defined as particle momentum devided by charge, R  p/Z  E/Z

10 Kotera & Olinto
maximum acceleration at the sources and/or containment in the Galactic magnetic field.
Just before the ankle, the trend seems to reverse back toward a lighter composition, being
consistent with light primaries at 1 EeV as shown in Figure 6. Figure 6 shows Auger data
on Xmax and RMS(Xmax) of 3754 events above 1 EeV together with a range covered by
simulations for protons and iron nuclei using different hadronic models (Abraham et al.
2010b). The dominance of light nuclei around a few EeV is also observed by HiRes who
reported a final reconstruction of 815 events in Abbasi et al. (2010).

   A surprising trend occurs in Auger data above 10 EeV, a change toward heavy primaries
is seen both in Xmax as well as in RMS(Xmax) up to 40 EeV. As a mixture of different
nuclei would increase the RMS(Xmax), the observed narrow distribution argues for a change
toward a composition dominated by heavy nuclei. Due to different reconstruction methods,
the HiRes measurement of fluctuations is not easily displayed in Figure 6, but their data
trend remains closer to light primaries up to around 50 EeV. The two results are consistent
within quoted errors, so the situation is currently unclear.

   Shower properties observed by Auger up to 40 EeV are quite challenging to candidate
acceleration models because they conflict with the prevailing view that the primaries are
proton dominated. The observed hint of anisotropies also points to light primaries (Abreu
et al. 2010). Studies of ultrahigh energy nuclei propagation require unusual choices in
attempts to fit the observed composition indicators, such as a hard injection spectrum (s 
1.6) with primaries dominated by nitrogen or silicon (Hooper & Taylor 2010). Given the
measurement uncertainties, some reasonable but "disappointing" options are also possible
such as models where protons have a low maximum energy and the observed steepening
of the spectrum, above 30 EeV, is due to the maximum energy of iron nuclei (Aloisio
et al. 2009; Allard et al. 2008; Allard 2009). In this case, the feature in the observed
spectrum is mainly due to the maximum accelerator energy which is coincidently close to
the expected GZK cutoff. As discussed in Section 6, most known astrophysical accelerators
have Emax close to GZK energies, so the coincidence may actually be real. The challenge
to extragalactic candidate sources is to explain the origin of such high metallicities in the
accelerated material. These observations have also motivated a return to the possibility
that Galactic cosmic ray sources significantly contribute at ultrahigh energies (Calvez et al.
2010).

   As recently highlighted in Schwarzschild (2010), changes to hadronic interactions from
current extrapolations provide a plausible alternative interpretation to the observed shower
development behavior. Auger probes interactions above 100 TeV center of mass, while
hadronic interactions are only known around a TeV. The observation of anisotropies and
secondary particles (neutrinos and gamma-rays) can lead to astrophysical constraints on
the composition of UHECRs, opening the possibility for the study of hadronic interaction
cross sections, multiplicities, and other interaction parameters at hundreds of TeV.

   The detailed composition of UHECRs is still to be understood, but it is clear that pri-
maries are not dominated by photons (Abraham et al. 2008; Abraham et al. 2009c) or
neutrinos (Abraham et al. 2009a; Abbasi et al. 2008a). Limits on the photon fraction place
stringent limits on models where UHECRs are generated by the decay of super heavy dark
matter and topological defects. Unfortunately, the uncertainties on the UHECR source

                                                                                        Astrophysics of UHECRs 11
        Figure 7:
        Proton energy loss lengths: black solid line for photo-pion production on CMB and IR-UV
        photons; red solid line for pair production on CMB photons. Dashed lines represent the
        interaction length (or mean free path to interaction) for photo-pion production on CMB photons
        (thick) and IR-UV photons (thin), assuming the background of Stecker et al. (2006). The dotted
        line indicates the losses due to cosmological expansion.

       composition, spectrum, and redshift evolution translates to many orders of magnitude un-
       certainty in the expected cosmogenic neutrino flux as discussed in Section 6.

      3 The propagation of Ultrahigh Energy Cosmic Rays
       While propagating from their sources to the observer, UHECRs experience two types of
       processes: (i) interactions with cosmic backgrounds that affect their energy and their com-
       position, but not their direction; and (ii) interactions with cosmic magnetic fields that affect
       their direction and travel time, but not their energy and composition. Both leave a variety
       of signatures on the observables of UHECRs and generate secondary neutrinos and gamma
       rays (see Section 6.3).

12 Kotera & Olinto
3.1 Interaction processes on cosmic backgrounds

In the intergalactic medium, cosmic rays primarily interact with the Cosmic Microwave
Background (CMB) photons at the highest energies, and with infrared, optical, and ultra-
violet background (IR-UV) photons at slightly lower energy (see, e.g., Kneiske et al. 2004;
Stecker et al. 2006 for detailed background models).

   Photohadronic interactions between protons and background photons mainly lead to
pion production: p  - N + n (here N is a nucleon and n is the number of pi-
ons produced), or to electron-positron pair production, also called Bethe-Heitler process:
p  - p e+ e-. The energy threshold of these interactions for a photon of energy
reads: Ep,  200 EeV ( CMB/ ) for pion production, and for pair production: Ep,ee 
0.8 EeV ( CMB/ ), with CMB 2.7 kBTCMB  6 ◊ 10-4 eV, the mean energy of a CMB
photon.

   We plot in Figure 7 the energy loss lengths xloss  |E-1dE/c dt|-1 for these two processes,
using analytical formulae by Stecker (1968) (also see Maximon 1968; Genzel et al. 1973;
Begelman et al. 1990; Mu®cke et al. 1999). Above E  60 EeV, the distance that particles
can travel without losing their energy shortens considerably. If cosmic rays originate from
cosmological distances, their flux above this energy should be consequently suppressed,
producing the well-known GZK feature in the UHECR spectrum (see Section 2.1). This
property further imposes that the sources of the observed UHECRs at a given energy
should be located in our local Universe, within a distance l xloss(E). Losses due to the
cosmological expansion are also represented in Figure 7.

   For primary cosmic rays with mass number A > 1, different interaction processes come
into play. At ultrahigh energies, nuclei photo-disintegrate on CMB and IR-UV photons
through three main types of processes that contribute at increasing energy ranges: the
Giant Dipolar Resonance (for  8 - 30 MeV), the Quasi Deuteron process (for 
20 - 150 MeV), and the Baryonic Resonance (for  150 MeV). In a first approximation,
one can consider that the Lorentz factor of the primary nucleus remains unchanged through
these interactions. Nuclei also experience photo-pair production that decreases the Lorentz
factor without affecting the number of nucleons.

   After pioneering work by Puget et al. (1976), energy losses for nuclei have been examined
by several groups (Stecker & Salamon 1999; Epele & Roulet 1998a,b; Bertone et al. 2002;
Khan et al. 2005; Allard et al. 2005, 2008; Hooper et al. 2005, 2008; Aloisio et al. 2008).
One remarkable effect of the propagation of nuclei is that nuclei with mass number A < 20
cannot travel farther than few tens of megaparsecs without disintegrating (see Figure 4). In
particular, one can conclude that heavy nuclei could be found in abundance at trans-GZK
energies only if the composition were essentially dominated by iron group nuclei. Such a
composition can arise when the proton Emax is smaller than Ep,, so that only heavy nuclei
are present at greater energies (Allard et al. 2008; Aloisio et al. 2009).

   The effect of photo-hadronic interactions on the cosmic ray spectrum can be calculated
analytically for protons (Berezinsky & Grigorieva 1988; Berezinsky et al. 2006). Numerical
codes such as SOPHIA (Mu®cke et al. 1999) enable the precise evaluation of the cross-sections
for photo-hadronic interactions taking into account various channels, and of the produced

                                                                                        Astrophysics of UHECRs 13
                         Galaxy (disk + halo)                         vicinity of the         source
                           1kpc x 10kpc 10 - 100 kpc                      source

                                                            clusters
                                                              5 Mpc

                         scattering centers                                                       source
                            (radio halos,                                                     environment

                         galactic winds, ...)                                                    (cluster)

                                       1 Mpc                                                  5 - 10 Mpc

supercluster?                                  30 - 40 Mpc            filaments               magnetic field
            10 - 30 Mpc                                                  1 Mpc                       in voids?

                                                                                10 - 300 Mpc

Figure 8:

Schematic representation of magnetized regions intervening in UHECR propagation. Their
approximative characteristic length scales are indicated in grey.

flux of secondary particles (pioneered by Berezinsky & Gazizov 1993). Numerical Monte-
Carlo methods are best suited to model inhomogeneous distribution of sources, calculate
secondary emissions, and treat the complex processes intervening in the propagation of
nuclei in the intergalactic medium. Among the existing propagation codes that have been
developed for this purpose, one might refer to the public code CRPropa (Armengaud et al.
2007) and to the complete nuclei propagation tool by Allard et al. (2006).

   The calculated spectra are in very good agreement with the observed spectra for a variety
of chemical compositions, Galactic to extragalactic transition models, source evolution his-
tories, and injection spectrum indices between 1.6 - 2.7, for a fixed maximum acceleration
energy, Emax (see, e.g., Figure 2). Kachelriess & Semikoz (2006) demonstrate that relaxing
the assumption of a single maximum acceleration energy and introducing a power-law dis-
tribution of Emax leads to a change in the overall propagated spectrum slope. A key region
for models to fit is the ankle around a few EeV where the spectral slope changes (see Section
4). The precise shape of the GZK feature depends on the local source density and on the
transient or continuously emitting natures of the sources (see, e.g., Aloisio & Boncioli 2010;
Berezinsky et al. 2006; Blasi et al. 1999; Medina Tanco 1998; Miralda-Escud¥e & Waxman
1996). For instance, if Emax 100 EeV a recovery of the spectrum at high energies can be
observed by future detectors.

3.2 The effects of Magnetic fields

The absence of powerful astrophysical counterparts in the arrival directions of UHECRs
is probably related to the effect of cosmic magnetic fields that deflect and delay particles
during their propagation. Charged particles are subject to the influence of magnetic fields

14 Kotera & Olinto
in the source environment, in the intergalactic medium, and in the Galaxy, as depicted in
Figure 8. Since very little is known about cosmic magnetic fields (for recent reviews see,
e.g., Beck 2008; Kulsrud & Zweibel 2008; Vall¥ee 2004; Widrow 2002; Kronberg 1994), the
parameter space for an accurate description is quite large. Different propagation regimes
apply to different cosmic ray rigidities, from weak angular deflection at the highest energies
or in weak magnetic fields, to the diffusive regime in strong fields or at low enough energies.
Figure 8 shows schematic representations of magnetized regions intervening in UHECR
propagation.

   Much progress has been made in recent years on Galactic magnetic field observations (see
Han et al. 1999, 2006; Han 2008; Jansson et al. 2009) and their effect on the propagation of
UHECRs (Harari et al. 1999; Alvarez-Mun~iz et al. 2002; Tinyakov & Tkachev 2002, 2005).
These studies conclude that the deflection for particles of charge Z and energy E should not
exceed  10 Z (40 EeV/E). In particular, the regular component of the Galactic magnetic
field can distort the angular images of cosmic ray sources: the flux may appear dispersed
around the source or globally translated in the sky with a small dispersion (Harari et al.
1999). Source image distortions are stronger for heavier nuclei (see, e.g., Giacinti et al.
2010). Since Galactic magnetic fields are not uniform in the sky, angular deflections also
depend on the observed direction (Harari et al. 1999; Kachelrieﬂ et al. 2007; Takami & Sato
2008).

   The extragalactic magnetic field (EGMF)3 is much less known. Measurements of Faraday
rotation provide estimates of the magnetic fields in the core of clusters of galaxies, with
typical strengths  1 - 40 µG (see above reviews). Outside clusters upper limits on the in-
tegrated strength of the magnetic field parallel to the line of sight, B||, have been obtained
using rotation measures (Ryu et al. 1998; Blasi et al. 1999): B||2 B 1/2 10-8 G Mpc1/2,
where the field reversal scale, B 1 Mpc, given the typical turbulent velocities (e.g., Wax-
man & Bahcall 1999). The future SKA project (Beck et al. 2007) will enlarge considerably
the observations of the EGMF in our local Universe. Meanwhile, Neronov & Semikoz (2009)
demonstrated that the observation of extended gamma-ray emission around point sources
together with time delays in gamma-ray flares should provide robust measurements of the
EGMF, and help constrain scenarios of its origin. Based on recent Fermi (Fermi Gamma-
ray Space Telescope) observations, the existence of an EGMF of order 10?16 - 10?15 G has
been suggested using upper limits on the secondary emission of a few blazars Neronov &
Vovk (2010) and by the apparent (and debated, see e.g., Neronov et al. 2011) detection of
pair halos in stacked images of a large number of sources Ando & Kusenko (2010). These
new developments may lead to stronger constraints or even detections of the EGMF, which
at present can range from 10-16 - 10-9 G.

   The origins of extragalactic magnetic fields are not well understood (e.g., Kulsrud &
Zweibel 2008). Some models set their origins in the primordial Universe (see Widrow 2002
and references therein) other models through magnetic pollution from astrophysical sources
such as galactic winds or jets from radio-galaxies (Kronberg et al. 1999; Birk et al. 2000;
Aguirre et al. 2001; Cen et al. 2005; Bertone et al. 2005, 2006; Scannapieco et al. 2006).

    3also called the intergalactic magnetic field (IGMF)

                                                                                        Astrophysics of UHECRs 15
        Figure 9:

        Cumulative volume filling factor of the extragalactic magnetic field for different numerical
        simulations. Blue dashed: Sigl et al. (2004), red dash-dotted: Dolag et al. (2005), pink long
        dashed: Das et al. (2008), green solid: Donnert et al. (2009).

       If magnetic fields have a primordial origin, they should be all-pervading and amplified in
       dense regions by dynamical effects induced by large-scale structure formation. If galaxies
       are the primary generators of magnetic enrichment, the field should be rather concentrated
       in high peaked density regions and nearly suppressed in voids, depending on the efficiency
       of the winds (Bertone et al. 2006). A combination of the two scenarios may occur, as
       well as intermediate models in which magnetic pollution happens during the reionization
       epoch, generating slightly inhomogeneous fields already at high redshift. Whatever the
       origin of extragalactic fields, dynamical amplification in dense regions during structure
       collapse should play a key role in setting up their present configuration (Bruni et al. 2003;
       Siemieniec-Ozie∏blo & Golda 2004; King & Coles 2006; Ryu et al. 2008).

          The structure and strength of the EGMF can strongly affect the propagation of UHECRs.
       Early simulations of cosmic ray propagation in EGMFs considered homogeneous magnetic
       fields or the lensing effect of the magnetized local supercluster (Medina Tanco et al. 1997;
       Lemoine et al. 1997; Sigl et al. 1997; Medina Tanco 1998; Sigl et al. 1999; Ide et al. 2001;
       Isola et al. 2002; Isola & Sigl 2002; Stanev et al. 2003). Analytical works of Wdowczyk &

16 Kotera & Olinto
Wolfendale (1979); Blasi & Olinto (1999); Waxman & Miralda-Escud¥e (1996); Achterberg
et al. (1999); Harari et al. (2002b,a); Kotera & Lemoine (2008b), and Aharonian et al. (2010)
have helped to establish the influence of the EGMF on observable UHECR quantities.

   More recently, various groups have developed simulations of the formation of large scale
structures including magnetic fields, in order to model more realistic inhomogeneous config-
urations (Ryu et al. 1998; Sigl et al. 2004; Dolag et al. 2004, 2005; Bru®ggen et al. 2005; Ryu
et al. 2008; Dubois & Teyssier 2008; Das et al. 2008; Donnert et al. 2009). Most of these
authors set an initial magnetic seed at high redshift which is then evolved in time. The
overall amplitude of the field is rescaled at the end of the simulation so as to reproduce the
observed strength of magnetic fields in the core of clusters of galaxies. Ryu et al. (1998) and
Das et al. (2008) estimate directly the intensity of the magnetic field using the vorticity and
the energy density calculated from the kinetic properties of the gas. With these methods,
magnetic fields generated by astrophysical feedback can be hard to implement (see, however
Donnert et al. 2009 who have incorporated some of these effects).

   These simulations lead to very discrepant results concerning the configuration of the fields
(see Figure 9). These differences probably stem from the different methods and assumptions
made by each group, and illustrate the inherent complexity of these simulations. Indeed,
Ryu et al. (1998) and Sigl et al. (2004) assume that magnetic seeds are generated by
Biermann battery effects around accretion shocks, whereas Dolag et al. (2005) implement
a homogeneous seed around redshift z  20, and Donnert et al. (2009) add to the latter
method astrophysical magnetic pollution in localized spots at lower redshifts. The difference
in configuration probably also results from the Eulerian and Lagrangian treatments used
by the different groups and limitations on dynamical range and resolution.

   Such discrepancies on the magnetic fields impact the range of deflections induced on
UHECRs. For instance, Sigl et al. (2004) find that protons with energy E > 100 EeV
should be deflected by 10 - 20, while Dolag et al. (2004) find deflections of less than a
degree at the same energy.

   In the framework of UHECR propagation, a simpler and faster approach to model the
inhomogeneous extragalactic magnetic field is to perform a scaling of the field strength to
the underlying density field (Medina Tanco 1997; Takami et al. 2006; Takami & Sato 2008;
Kotera & Lemoine 2008a). The assumed scaling law enables one to account for various
types of magnetic field amplifications due to structure formation and for the high con-
trast fields that should be produced by astrophysical pollution. In addition, an analytic
stochastic approach can be effective in describing the propagation of UHECRs in the ex-
tragalactic fields because of the high energy of the particles and the low magnetization of
voids (Kotera & Lemoine 2008b). Indeed, the deflection of UHECRs by magnetic fields of
strength B < 10-12 G is lower than typical instrument resolutions which are  1. Particle
transport can then be viewed as a succession of rectilinear portions interrupted by deflec-
tions on localized magnetized regions (such as filaments, halos of radio-galaxies and galactic
winds). This model can be applied to the coherent field amplified in numerical simulations
as well as for the local enrichment processes due to astrophysical sources, and provides an
effective framework to calculate the influence of magnetic fields on observable quantities of
UHECRs (see, for example, the expected angular deflection skymap for protons calculated

                                                                                        Astrophysics of UHECRs 17
        Figure 10:
         Expected angular deflection skymap (in degrees) for protons with energy E 6 ◊ 1019 eV, calculated
         using the method developed in Kotera & Lemoine (2008b). During their propagation, particles are
         assumed to be deflected on magnetized scattering centers that are distributed according to the galaxy
         density estimated using the PSCz catalog (Saunders et al. 2000). The gray mask indicates the regions in
         the sky that are not covered by PSCz. Here, the parameters of the scattering centers (that sets a
         particular configuration of the EGMF) are chosen so as to reproduce the typical parameters found in the
         literature for magnetized filaments and radio halos: we assume that protons encounter  3 scattering
         centers in average over a propagation distance of  100 Mpc and experience a deflection of order 1.7
         after each encountering. White dots indicate the arrival direction of the cosmic rays of energy
         E 6 ◊ 1019 eV detected by Auger (Abreu et al. 2010).

       for particular assumptions on EGMF presented in Figure 10).

          If the magnetic field is sufficiently strong, or the particle energy "not too high", UHECRs
       may enter a diffusive regime. One can define the scattering time of a particle, tscatt, as the
       timescale beyond which its quadratic deflection angle becomes of order unity (2  1).
       This quantity depends on the properties of the turbulence of the magnetic field. Diffusion
       occurs when the travel time exceeds tscatt, and the diffusion coefficients, which govern the
       transport on timescales t tscatt, also depend on the properties of the turbulence.

          The propagated spectrum of UHECRs in the diffusive regime can be calculated analyti-
       cally for a given injection spectrum, density and distribution of sources, for homogeneous
       magnetic fields (Aloisio & Berezinsky 2004; Lemoine 2005; Aloisio & Berezinsky 2004). In-
       terestingly, Aloisio & Berezinsky (2004) have demonstrated that the analytical propagated
       spectra for both rectilinear (without magnetic field) and diffusive propagations converge
       when the typical distance between two sources is shorter than the characteristic propaga-
       tion lengths (i.e. the scattering length and the energy loss lengths). This is particularly the
       case of continuously distributed sources for which the diffusion of particles in the magnetic

18 Kotera & Olinto
field does affect the final spectrum.
   When the strong magnetic field is not all pervading but limited to a particular geometry,

the diffusive regime can lead to interesting confinement effects. For instance, the properties
of UHECR transport in a strongly magnetized local supercluster or in clusters of galaxies
have been discussed (e.g., Berezinsky et al. 1990a, 1997; Blasi & Olinto 1999; Lemoine et al.
1999; Ide et al. 2001; Medina Tanco 2001, and see Section 6.3 for more references on clusters
of galaxies).

   Another interesting aspect of diffusion, from the point of view of phenomenology, is that
of magnetic horizons that will be discussed in the next section. If the length of the path trav-
elled by the particle, from source to observer, becomes larger than the Hubble length, cH0-1,
the source cannot be seen in cosmic rays as it lies beyond the magnetic horizon. In a Hubble
time, particles travel a linear distance d  c H0-1tscatt 1/2 65 Mpc (ctscatt/1 Mpc)1/2.
Since tscatt, and hence d, increases with increasing energy, this produces a low-energy cut-off
in the propagated spectrum.

4 The Galactic to extragalactic transition

The highest energy cosmic rays are likely to originate in extragalactic sources, given the
strength of Galactic magnetic fields and the lack of correlations with the Galactic plane.
Low energy cosmic rays are easily created and contained in the Galaxy, so a transition
region should occur in some intermediate energy. "A hypothesis blessed by long tradition
is that" Galactic cosmic rays end below 10 EeV "and above that a different source is active
(most plausibly in the nearby supercluster of galaxies)" quoting Hillas (1984). Modern
measurements of the spectrum place a plausible transition region around the ankle at a
few EeV (Figure 1 and 2). However, the ankle can also be interpreted as the product of
propagation losses due to pair production (Berezinsky & Grigorieva 1988; Berezinsky et al.
2006) in proton dominated scenarios allowing for a transition at lower energies.

   The knee in the cosmic ray spectrum is likely to signal the Emax for light nuclei of
dominant Galactic sources and/or the maximum containment energy for light nuclei in the
Galactic magnetic field. The same effect for heavier nuclei may cause the softer spectrum
above the knee (see, e.g., Lemoine 2005; Hillas 2006). Extragalactic sources producing
spectra harder than s = 3 can overtake the decaying Galactic flux around the ankle. Recent
studies of a transition at the ankle which fit the observed spectrum and the composition
trends in this energy region are discussed in Allard et al. (2005) where different models are
contrasted. Models based on proton primaries with a hard spectrum (Wibig & Wolfendale
2004), on a mixed composition with proportions similar to the Galactic mix, or even on a
composition dominated by heavy nuclei (Allard et al. 2007) fit well the UHECR spectrum
and composition data around the ankle. In Figure 2, we show two examples of the so-called
"ankle transition models": one with source injection s = 2.1, source composition similar to
the Galactic mixture, and source evolution that follows the SFR; and a second model with
similar source evolution and s = 2, but a pure iron composition injected. Both models fit
well the UHECR spectrum but predict different compositions throughout this energy range.

   Ankle transition models work well for UHECR scenarios, but they were thought to chal-

                                                                                        Astrophysics of UHECRs 19
       lenge models for the origin of Galactic cosmic rays. The requirement that Galactic sources
       reach energies close to the ankle strained traditional models where acceleration in supernova
       remnants (SNRs) was expected to fade around 1 PeV (Lagage & Cesarsky 1983). A modi-
       fication to the traditional SNR scenario, such as magnetic field amplification in SN shocks
       (Bell & Lucek 2001), or a different progenitors such as Wolf-Rayet star winds (Biermann
       & Cassinelli 1993), and trans-relativistic supernovae (Budnik et al. 2008) may explain the
       energy gap from PeV to EeV. Taking into account magnetic field amplification and Alfvenic
       drift in shocks of Type IIb SNRs, Ptuskin et al. (2010) find that Galactic cosmic ray iron
       can reach Emax  5 EeV, allowing extragalactic cosmic rays to begin to dominate above
       the ankle.

          The possibility that the ankle is due to pair-production losses during the propagation of
       extragalactic protons (Berezinsky & Grigorieva 1988) has motivated an alternative model
       for the Galactic to extragalactic transition, called "dip models" (Berezinsky et al. 2006).
       The energy of the predicted dip is close to the observed ankle and a good fit to the spectrum
       over a large energy range is reached with a softer injection index as the dip proton models
       shown in Figure 2. This option relaxes the need for Galactic cosmic rays to reach close to
       EeV energies, however it needs to be tuned to avoid strong (unobserved) spectral features
       between the knee and the ankle. Detailed models where the lower energy behavior of the
       extragalactic component blends smoothly with the Galactic cosmic rays have been developed
       using minimum energy and magnetic effects (Lemoine 2005; Aloisio & Berezinsky 2005;
       Hillas 2006; Kotera & Lemoine 2008a; Globus et al. 2008). In some of these models a
       feature is produced around the "second knee" which may be observed around 0.5 EeV. The
       dip model can fit the observed spectrum if the injection is proton dominated (Berezinsky
       et al. 2005; Allard et al. 2007) or with at most a primordial proton to helium mix (Hillas
       2006), which gives a clear path for distinguishing it from mixed composition models. A
       proton dominated flux below the ankle region is a necessary condition for this model to be
       verified.

          Clarifying the structure of the transition region is crucial for reaching a coherent picture
       of the origin of Galactic and extragalactic cosmic rays. This will require accurate spectrum
       and composition measurements from the knee to the ankle and beyond. KASCADE-Grande
       (Apel et al. 2009) has made great progress above the knee, while UHECR projects have
       started to lower their energy threshold such as the Auger Observatory enhancements (Abra-
       ham et al. 2009b): HEAT (High Elevation Auger Telescopes) and AMIGA (Auger Muons
       and Inll for the Ground Array); and the Telescope Array Low Energy Extension (TALE)
       proposal. Having the same system covering a large range in energy will help control sys-
       tematic offsets that degrade the accuracy of the needed precision. In addition, a strong
       multi-wavelength program has shown that magnetic field amplification occurs in SNRs and
       Galactic sources can reach further than previously believed. Finally, models of hadronic
       interactions will benefit from the energy reach of the LHC which can probe hadronic interac-
       tions at energies higher than the knee (Figure 1) and help constrain composition indicators
       between the knee and the ankle.

20 Kotera & Olinto
5 Acceleration Mechanisms

The acceleration of charged particles is easily achieved in the presence of electric fields.
However, ubiquitous astrophysical plasmas destroy large scales electric fields throughout
the universe. Occasionally, high voltage drops that may lead to particle acceleration can
be found in some regions of the magnetosphere or the wind of neutron stars, or near black
holes and their accretion disks. In contrast, magnetic fields are omnipresent in astrophysical
objects. Their variations in space and time imply the existence of transient electric fields
which can supply a consequent amount of energy to charged particles.

   In our framework, acceleration mechanisms must fulfill the following criteria: they should
enable charged particles to reach ultrahigh energies (from EeV to above 200 EeV) and the
accelerated population should bear an injection spectrum (usually power-law) that would
fit the observed UHECR spectrum after propagation. Below we summarize two of the most
commonly cited acceleration mechanisms, Fermi acceleration and unipolar inductors, and
briefly discuss other processes that have been proposed in the literature.

5.1 Fermi acceleration at shock waves

The principle of Fermi acceleration is the transfer of energy from macroscopic motion to
microscopic particles through their interaction with magnetic inhomogeneities. In the ver-
sion elaborated by Fermi himself (Fermi 1949), magnetic scattering centers had random
velocities which led to an energy gain of order E/E  2, where  is the average ve-
locity of the scattering centers in units of c. This process is now called 2nd order Fermi
acceleration, while the 1st order Fermi process is the case where the macroscopic motion
is coherent, such as a shock wave where particles can gain energy as they bounce back
and forth, making E/E   (Axford et al. 1977; Bell 1978; Blandford & Ostriker 1978).
Shock waves are quite frequent in the Universe, for instance where an ejecta encounters the
interstellar medium. SNR shocks are believed to be the sites where Galactic cosmic rays are
accelerated via 1st order Fermi processes. Popular shock regions for UHECR acceleration
are GRB shocks, jets and hot spots of AGN, and gravitational accretion shocks.

   Second order Fermi acceleration depends on the scattering time of particles in the mag-
netic turbulence and thus on the characteristics of the latter, which are poorly known in
astrophysical objects. It is less efficient than 1st order Fermi in the non relativistic limit
( 1). In the relativistic case (Pelletier 1999), it has been applied to acceleration studies
inside GRBs (Pelletier & Kersal¥e 2000; Gialis & Pelletier 2003, 2004, 2005).

   First order Fermi processes under the `test particle' approximation4, lead to simple power-
law predictions for the spectrum of the accelerated population (see, e.g., Gaisser 1991). Sev-
eral recent studies show that 1st order Fermi acceleration at relativistic shock waves is more
intricate, even under the test particle approximation (Gallant & Achterberg 1999; Lemoine
& Pelletier 2003; Lemoine et al. 2006; Pelletier et al. 2009). Lemoine et al. (2006) have
pointed out that Fermi acceleration cannot happen if the Larmor radius of the accelerated

    4i.e., assuming that the density of accelerated particles is negligible compared to the thermal energy
of the plasma in which the shock propagates, and hence that they do not produce a back-reaction on the
shock.

                                                                                        Astrophysics of UHECRs 21
       particle is much smaller than the coherence length of the magnetic field. Indeed, the particle
       is then captured on a field line and advected far away downstream since the magnetic field
       is shock-compressed to a perpendicular configuration. Fermi acceleration should thus stop
       after a first back and forth cycle around the shock, unless the magnetic field is strongly
       amplified on spatial scales much smaller than the Larmor radius rL of the particle. It was
       further demonstrated by Pelletier et al. (2009) that the noise associated with the motion
       in the small scale turbulent magnetic field needs to overcome the unperturbed trajectory
       in the large scale coherent field, which sets an upper bound to rL (see also, Niemiec et al.
       2006).

          Such requirements being hardly reached for ultra-relativistic shocks, as discussed by Pel-
       letier et al. (2009), one might advocate that the most efficient Fermi acceleration occurs
       around mildly relativistic shocks. The characteristics of the accelerated population strongly
       depend on shock parameters (e.g., the shock Lorentz factor sh, temperature and pressure
       values). No general tendency is easily derived, as can be concluded from the large span
       of spectral properties obtained by the groups who have performed detailed studies of par-
       ticle acceleration around mildly relativistic shocks in various situations (e.g., Bednarz &
       Ostrowski 1998; Kirk et al. 2000).

          Accelerated particles can act as precursors of the shock and induce significant modifi-
       cations of the gas flow upstream and downstream. The current of energetic particles can
       initiate plasma instabilities that tend to increase the level of magnetohydrodynamic (MHD)
       turbulence which scatter the particles. The possibility that streaming instabilities amplify
       the magnetic field, and that the acceleration efficiency could increase accordingly, was first
       discussed in the framework of non relativistic shocks in SNRs (Bell 1978; Lagage & Cesarsky
       1983). More detailed work was conducted by, e.g., McKenzie & Voelk (1982); Berezhko &
       Ellison (1999); Lucek & Bell (2000); Malkov & O'C Drury (2001); Bell & Lucek (2001); Bell
       (2004); Amato & Blasi (2005, 2006, 2009); Zirakashvili et al. (2008); Reville et al. (2008).
       The estimated amplification of the upstream field is at most of two orders of magnitude.
       The generalization of the instability to the relativistic regime (Milosavljevi¥c & Nakar 2006;
       Reville et al. 2007; Pelletier et al. 2009) reveals that this mechanism is not sufficient to
       allow efficient 1st order Fermi acceleration around ultra-relativistic shocks. Other mecha-
       nisms outside the MHD range, such as Weibel like instabilities (Medvedev & Zakutnyaya
       2009) or resonant Cerenkov effects with plasma modes (Pelletier et al. 2009) might yet
       provide enough amplification to allow successful Fermi acceleration. Downstream of the
       shock, the relativistic two stream Weibel instability could amplify the magnetic field on
       small scales, to the level required by afterglow modeling of gamma-ray bursts (Gruzinov &
       Waxman 1999; Medvedev & Loeb 1999). In order to make progress on these issues, many
       groups are performing Particle-In-Cell simulations that endeavor to solve self-consistently
       the field-particle interactions (e.g., Silva et al. 2003; Hededal & Nishikawa 2005; Dieckmann
       et al. 2008; Spitkovsky 2008; Riquelme & Spitkovsky 2010). It is promising that the latest
       simulations see evidences of Fermi acceleration and particle-wave interactions.

          Finally, when modeling Fermi acceleration around shocks, mechanisms of "shear accelera-
       tion" have to be taken into account. Particles traversing a velocity gradient perpendicularly
       to a jet axis (instead of going along the axis as in the case of pure shock acceleration) can

22 Kotera & Olinto
experience acceleration (e.g., Rieger et al. 2007, see Rieger & Duffy 2005 for an application
to acceleration of UHECRs in GRBs, Lyutikov & Ouyed 2007 for a variant). This mech-
anism however depends on the characteristics of the plasma velocity gradients, which are
not fixed, unlike the shock characteristics.

5.2 Unipolar Inductors

Unipolar inductors have been suggested as alternative ways to accelerate particles to ultra-
high energies (see, e.g., Berezinsky et al. 1990b). Below we focus specifically on neutron
stars, but acceleration may also be caused by unipolar inductors in other relativistic mag-
netic rotators, such as black holes with magnetized disks that lose rotational energy in
jets.

   Rapidly rotating neutron stars generally create relativistic outflows ("winds"), where
the combination of the rotational energy and the strong magnetic field induces an elec-
tric field E = v ◊ B/c (where v and B are the velocity and the magnetic field of the
outflowing plasma). The wind thus presents voltage drops where charged particles can
be accelerated to high energy. This model was first developed in the framework of ordi-
nary pulsars (see, e.g., Shapiro & Teukolsky 1983 and references therein), but the latter
do not supply enough energy to reach the highest energies (E > 1020 eV). Blasi et al.
(2000) pointed out that young neutron stars with millisecond rotation periods  and
very high surface magnetic fields B (i.e., magnetars) could easily accelerate particles to:
E()  3 ◊ 1021 eV Z1(B/2 ◊ 1015 G)(R/10 km)3(/104 s-1)2, where 1 = 0.1 is the
fraction of the voltage drop experienced by a particle and R is the radius of the star. The
spin down of the magnetar due to energy losses and the dependency of the particle acceler-
ation energy on  lead to a power-law spectrum for the population of cosmic rays produced
by a magnetar (Blasi et al. 2000; Arons 2003): dN/dE = 9c2I(1 + E/Eg)-1(2ZeBR3E)-1.
I is the principal inertial momentum of the magnetar and Eg is the energy corresponding
to its angular velocity, at which gravity wave losses and electromagnetic losses are equal.
Arons (2003) calculated that UHECRs should be produced at the very early stages of the
lives of magnetars (after a few days to get down to E  6 EeV), hence their emission can
be considered as an impulsive burst. Note that this model was introduced in the AGASA
era, in order to explain the absence of the GZK cut-off; with our current data however,
such a hard injection spectrum (s = 1) is problematic as it does not fit the observed slope.
An adequate distribution of initial voltages among magnetars can be found to soften the
spectrum while leading to gravitational waves (Kotera 2011).

   The toy model described above needs to be further investigated on several issues, for
instance on the nature of the ions injected in the wind, on the mechanism through which
the current in the wind taps the available voltage, and on the escape of the accelerated
particles from the wind and the wind nebula. A detailed discussion of such issues can be
found in Arons (2003).

                                                                                        Astrophysics of UHECRs 23
      5.3 Other models

       Among other models that have been proposed in the literature, one might consider magnetic
       reconnection acceleration, wake-field acceleration (often related to ponderomotive acceler-
       ation), and re-acceleration in sheared jets. In a plasma, a local reconfiguration of the
       magnetic field topology (or reconnection) happens when the plasma conductivity is not
       high enough to support the current associated with a magnetic field structure (see Zweibel
       & Yamada 2009 for a review). The field reaches a lower energy level configuration, and the
       liberated energy can be devoted to particle acceleration. This mechanism, responsible for
       the generation of high energy particles in solar flares, has been applied to UHECR accel-
       eration in pulsar winds (Coroniti 1990; Lyubarsky & Kirk 2001), in newborn millisecond
       pulsars (de Gouveia Dal Pino & Lazarian 2000), in termination shocks of pulsar winds
       (Lyubarsky 2003), and in GRB outflows (Thompson 2006). Some authors also proposed
       that, in Poynting-flux dominated flows (e.g., flows with Poynting to kinetic flux ratio 1),
       1st order Fermi acceleration could aliment this mechanism, as particles reflected in the mag-
       netized plasma could converge in the reconnection region (de Gouveia dal Pino & Lazarian
       2005; Giannios 2010).

          A wake-field is created in a plasma when waves with high charge separation travel through
       the plasma. It leads to the formation of ponderomotive forces (longitudinal Lorentz invari-
       ant nonlinear forces that a charged particle experiences in an inhomogeneous oscillating
       electromagnetic field) that can accelerate particles if they are trapped in the wave: par-
       ticles surf-ride the waves (Tajima & Dawson 1979; Chen et al. 2002). A simple form of
       surf-riding acceleration was developed in the case of a pulsar wind by Buckley (1977) and
       Contopoulos & Kazanas (2002). A detailed discussion for magnetar winds can also be found
       in Arons (2003).

          Other acceleration mechanisms have been proposed and may contribute to the acceler-
       ation of cosmic rays in the Galaxy. These include a variety of second order processes and
       many of them can be observed to operate in solar physics. However, they are believed to
       be too slow to be relevant to the acceleration of UHECRs.

      6 Candidate Sources and their signatures

       The requirements for astrophysical objects to be sources of UHECRs are quite stringent.
       After reviewing some of the basic requirements, we briefly discuss plausible sources such
       as accretion shocks in large scale structures, active galactic nuclei, gamma-ray bursts, and
       neutron stars or magnetars. For these different classes of candidate sources, we discuss the
       possibility of locating the sources with UHECR observations and review possible ways of
       discovering the sources with secondary photons and neutrinos.

      6.1 Candidate Source Requirements
       The Larmor radius, rL = E/ZeB  110 kpc Z-1(µG/B)(E/100 EeV), of UHECRs in
       Galactic magnetic fields is much larger than the thickness of the Galactic disk. Thus, con-
       finement in the Galaxy is not maintained at the highest energies, motivating the search

24 Kotera & Olinto
neutron star

proto  n  10 20

Fe eV
white 10 20
              eV  AGN
dwarf

                            AGN jets

                  GRB       hot spots

                       SNR

                            IGM shocks

Figure 11:
Updated Hillas (1984) diagram. Above the blue (red) line protons (iron nuclei) can be confined to
a maximum energy of Emax = 1020 eV. The most powerful candidate sources are shown with the
uncertainties in their parameters.

for extragalactic sources. Requiring that candidate sources be capable of confining par-
ticles up to Emax, translates into a simple selection criterium for candidate sources with
magnetic field strength B and extension R (Hillas 1984): rL  R, i.e., E  Emax 
1 EeV Z (B/1 µG)(R/1 kpc). Figure 11 presents the so-called Hillas diagram where can-
didate sources are placed in a B - R phase-space, taking into account the uncertainties
on these parameters (see also Ptitsyna & Troitsky 2010 for an updated discussion on the
Hillas diagram). Most astrophysical objects do not even reach the iron confinement line
up to 1020 eV, leaving the best candidates for UHECR acceleration to be: neutron stars,
Active Galactic Nuclei (AGN), Gamma Ray Bursts (GRBs), and accretion shocks in the
intergalactic medium. The Hillas criterion is a necessary condition, but not sufficient. In
particular, most UHECR acceleration models rely on time dependent environments and
relativistic outflows where the Lorentz factor  1. In the rest frame of the magnetized
plasma, particles can only be accelerated over a transverse distance R/, which changes
subsequently the Hillas criterion.

                                                                                        Astrophysics of UHECRs 25
          The maximum accessible energy further depends on many details of the acceleration re-
       gion but can be estimated by comparing the acceleration time, tacc, the escape time of
       particles from the acceleration region tesc, the lifetime of the source, tage, and the energy
       loss time due to expansion and to interactions with the ambient medium, tloss (see, e.g.,
       Norman et al. 1995a; Lemoine & Waxman 2009). The condition for successful acceleration
       can then be written tacc tesc, tage, tloss. The escape timescale tesc = R2/(2D), where D is
       the diffusion coefficient, depends on the characteristics of the transport of particles in the
       ambient medium, i.e., on the magnetic field and on the turbulence features. Detailed stud-
       ies of this subject can be found in, e.g., Jokipii (1966); Giacalone & Jokipii (1999); Casse
       et al. (2002); Yan & Lazarian (2002); Candia & Roulet (2004); Marcowith et al. (2006).
       Energy losses during acceleration are generally due to synchrotron radiation, to interac-
       tions with the radiative backgrounds, or to hadronic interactions, the latter process being
       mostly inefficient in diluted astrophysical media. The timescale for energy losses through
       synchrotron emission and pion production can be expressed in a generic way (Biermann &
       Strittmatter 1987): trad = (6m4pc3/Tm2e)E-1B-2(1 + A)-1, where A = 240 U /UB cor-
       responds to the ratio of the energy density of radiation leading to pion production U, to
       the magnetic energy density UB = B2/8. In the central region of an AGN for example, as-
       suming equipartition with the magnetic field (corresponding to the Eddington luminosity),
       for E20 = E/1020 eV and BG = B/1G, trad  105s E20 -1BG-2. This timescale has to be com-
       pared to the acceleration timescale which reads (Lemoine & Waxman 2009): tacc = A tL,
       where tL is the Larmor timescale and A 1 for all types of Fermi acceleration (non, mildly,
       or ultra-relativistic, 1st and 2nd order Fermi accelerations). For a non relativistic 1st order
       Fermi acceleration for instance, A  g/sh 2 and tacc  107s g E20BG-1sh -2, where the shock
       velocity sh 1 and g  D/(rLc) 1. Majoring this timescale with the radiative loss
       timescale leads to a maximum acceleration energy in the central region of AGN of order:
       Emax  1019 eV g-1/2BG-1/2sh.

          In the generic case of acceleration in an outflow, Lemoine & Waxman (2009) compare this
       acceleration time and the dynamical time tdyn  R/WWc of the outflow, to set a robust
       lower bound on the luminosity that a source must possess in order to be able to accelerate
       particles up to E = 1020 eVE20: L > LB  WR2B2/2 > 1045 Z-2E20 2 erg s-1. The
       magnetic luminosity LB of the source is written as a function of the size of the acceleration
       region R in the observer frame, in motion with Lorentz factor W (and velocity W) and
       imparted with a magnetic field of characteristic strength B. This quantity is not straight-
       forward to derive: the classical determination of the field strength using the synchrotron
       emission (assuming equipartition between the total energy density of non thermal particles
       and of the magnetic field for example), depends notably on the hardly known ratio between
       the leptonic and hadronic accelerated particles (e.g., Beck & Krause 2005). In the case of
       blazars for example, Celotti & Ghisellini (2008) discuss that their jets are not magnetically
       dominated and that Faranoff-Riley I (FRI) radio galaxies, TeV blazars, and BL Lac objects
       only possess magnetic luminosities of order 1042-44 erg s-1.

          It should be noted that the escape of particles from acceleration regions is an intricate
       issue that has been scarcely discussed in detail in the literature (note however the works
       of Norman et al. 1995a; Mannheim et al. 2001; Rachen 2008; Allard & Protheroe 2009).

26 Kotera & Olinto
Mannheim et al. (2001) and Rachen (2008) argue that one promising way to have high
energy particles leave the magnetized acceleration site would be that they be transformed
into neutrons. However, it is not obvious that such a scenario could produce a power-law
spectrum; the shape of the spectrum depends on the evolution of the optical depth to
photo-pion production (see, e.g., Waxman 2001).

   In addition to being able to accelerate up to Emax > 200 EeV, candidate UHECR ac-
celerators should have luminosities that can account for the observed fluxes. A simple
estimate of the required luminosity can be done assuming that all sources have the same
injection spectral index s, a L19 steady luminosity in cosmic rays above E19  1019 eV,
and that they are distributed homogeneously in the Universe with a density ns. To ac-
count for the observed flux of UHECRs at E19, the main quantity at play, nsL19, scales
as: (E3dN/dE)E=E19  1024 eV2 m-2 s-1 sr-1(ns/10-5 Mpc-3)(L19/1042 erg s-1), for the
case of s = 2.3 and Emax = 1020.5 eV. For reference, the number density of normal galax-
ies in the Universe today is of order 10-2 Mpc-3 (Blanton et al. 2003), and it drops to
10-9-10-8 Mpc-3 for Faranoff-Riley II(FRII) type galaxies (Wall et al. 2005). For transient
sources, this scaling can be translated into: (n s/10-9 Mpc-3 yr-1) (Etot,19/3 ◊ 1053 ergs),
where n s is the birth rate of the source and Etot,19 the total injected energy in cosmic rays
above E19.

   Below we discuss the main astrophysical sites where UHECRs may originate.

 6.1.1 Gravitational accretion shocks The accretion of dark matter and gas pro-
duce shocks around the largest structures of the Universe (clusters of galaxies, filaments,
walls), where diffusive shock acceleration can happen. For clusters of galaxies, one can
estimate the linear extension of the magnetized shock to  1 - 10 Mpc and the magnetic
field intensity on both sides of the shock to  1 µG (see, e.g., the recent radio detection of
synchrotron radiation from bow shocks in a merging cluster by van Weeren et al. 2010, that
indicates the presence of micro-gauss level magnetic fields far from the cluster center), which
would allow particles to be confined up to E  1020 eV. Note however that the strength
of the magnetic field upstream of the shock could actually be 1 µG, as it was produced
out of the weakly magnetized void; thus shock acceleration can occur only if the magnetic
field upstream can be strongly amplified (M. Lemoine and E. Zweibel, private comm., and
see tentative amplification mechanisms by Schlickeiser & Shukla 2003; Zweibel & Everett
2010). The detection of very high energy gamma rays from these shocks would enable us to
constrain these parameters. Clusters of galaxies have been considered as promising accel-
erators by various authors: Norman et al. (1995b); Kang et al. (1996, 1997); Miniati et al.
(2000); Ryu & Kang (2003); Inoue et al. (2005, 2007); Murase et al. (2008a). Recently,
Vannoni et al. (2009) performed a detailed time-dependent numerical calculation, including
energy losses due to interactions of protons with radiative backgrounds and demonstrated
that for realistic shock speeds of a few thousand km/s and a background magnetic field close
to 1 µG, the maximum energy achievable by protons cannot exceed a few times 1019 eV,
due to radiative losses.

                                                                                        Astrophysics of UHECRs 27
        6.1.2 Active Galactic Nuclei AGN are composed of an accretion disk around a
       central super-massive black hole and are sometimes associated with jets terminating in
       lobes (or hot spots) which can be detected in radio. One can classify these objects into two
       categories: radio quiet AGN with no prominent radio emission or jets and radio loud objects
       presenting jets. Both categories could in principle accelerate particles in their nuclei: for
       a black hole of mass Mbh  109 M , the equipartition magnetic field in the central region
       yields B  300 G. Assuming the central region to be of order R  100 A.U., particles
       could be confined up to Emax  150 EeV and accelerated to E 1020 eV by electrostatic
       acceleration in the black hole magnetosphere (e.g., Boldt & Ghosh 1999). This energy is
       hardly reached by particles in practice due to energy losses that they experience in this dense
       region (see above and Norman et al. 1995a; Henri et al. 1999; Rieger & Mannheim 2000).
       Radio loud galaxies could also accelerate particles in their inner jets, where one possible
       mechanism at play could be shear acceleration (see end of Section 5.1 and e.g. Rieger et al.
       2007). The quantity B R  0.3 G pc for the jets of Mbh  109 M , leading to Emax  300
       EeV, but the acceleration is limited by photo-interactions and adiabatic losses making the
       escape of UHE particles non trivial (Mannheim 1993). The most powerful radio-galaxies
       (Faranoff-Riley II galaxies and their associated Flat Spectrum Radio Quasars, noted FSRQ)
       present hot spots and bow shocks, formed at the termination of the jets by interaction with
       the intergalactic medium. For these regions, the same estimates for particle confinement
       energies as in jets can be found. For hot spots, shock acceleration and escape should
       be easier than in the jet (see, e.g., Rachen & Biermann 1993), but the acceleration in
       the bow shock is non trivial (Berezhko 2008). UHECR acceleration in AGN should lead to
       particular signatures in the gamma-ray spectrum of these sources, through various emissions
       such as proton synchrotron, photo-hadronic interactions that induce pair cascades, muon
       synchrotron etc. With more gamma-ray data on each source over a wide energy range
       (with, e.g., the future Cherenkov Telescope Array, or CTA), one could distinguish these
       hadronic signatures from leptonic acceleration ones and probe the UHECR acceleration in
       AGN (Hinton & Hofmann 2009). As discussed above, Lemoine & Waxman (2009) point out
       that only FRII/FSRQ radio-galaxies with magnetic luminosity LB 1045 erg s-1 (following
       the modeling of Celotti & Ghisellini 2008) meet the energetic requirements to accelerate
       particles to the highest energies. Under this assumption, one may argue that the local
       FRII galaxies are well known and do not seem to correlate with the arrival direction of the
       highest energy events. Possible reasons for this could be that the extragalactic magnetic
       fields are stronger than expected, and/or that cosmic rays are heavy nuclei. AGN are often
       suggested as continuous emitters of UHECRs, however transient events such as AGN flares
       more easily meet the UHECR acceleration requirements (Farrar & Gruzinov 2009). Other
       transient models for UHECR acceleration are discussed next.

        6.1.3 Gamma-ray Bursts The explosion of a GRB leads to the formation of multiple
       shock regions which are potential acceleration zones for UHECRs. The value of the magnetic
       field at these shocks is estimated to be of order B  106 G at a distance R  1012 cm from
       the center. These values are derived for internal shocks that happen before the ejected
       plasma reaches the interstellar medium, assuming B  1012 G near the central engine (of

28 Kotera & Olinto
size R  10 km) and an evolution B  R-1. The wide green region presented in Figure 11
stems from this dependency: parameters can take different values at different times of the
GRB explosion. These objects have been examined by various authors as possible sources
of UHECRs (Waxman 1995, 2001; Vietri 1995; Gialis & Pelletier 2003; Murase et al. 2006,
2008b). These authors invoke Fermi processes at external shocks (Vietri 1995), at mildly
relativistic internal or reverse shocks (Waxman 1995, 2001; Murase et al. 2008b), or 2nd
order Fermi processes through multiple interactions with mildly relativistic internal shocks
(Gialis & Pelletier 2003). Overall, models allow acceleration up to  1020 eV provided
that some assumptions on the source parameters are verified (e.g., magnetic field strength,
turbulence, etc.). The flux of gamma-rays reaching the Earth from GRBs is generally
comparable to the observed flux of UHECRs, implying a tight energetic requirement for
GRBs to be the sources of UHECRs. With a GRB rate of  0.3 Gpc-3 yr-1 at z = 0, it
can be calculated that the energy injected isotropically (regardless of beaming) in UHECRs
is of order EUHECR 1053 erg, (Guetta & Piran 2007; Zitouni et al. 2008; Budnik et al.
2008). Note also that the transient nature of these objects could possibly explain the lack
of powerful counterparts correlating with the arrival direction of the highest energy cosmic
rays.

 6.1.4 Neutron Stars Neutrons stars - young millisecond magnetars to be precise,
easily fulfill the Hillas criterion, and might prove to be very good candidate sources, though
they are scarcely discussed in the literature. Magnetars are neutron stars with extremely
strong surface dipole fields of order 1015 G (see Wood & Thompson 2004, Harding & Lai
2006 and Merghetti 2008 for reviews). Blasi et al. (2000) studied the possibility that UHE-
CRs are accelerated through unipolar induction in the relativistic winds for rapidly rotating
magnetars, building up on previous constraints by Venkatesan et al. (1997). The maximum
energy reached by particles injected by these objects is very promising (see Section 5.2).
Arons (2003) further developed the model and found that only 5% of the extragalactic mag-
netar population need to be fast-rotators to account for the observed UHECR energetics.
Magnetars, as GRBs, are transient sources and should not be observed in coincidence with
UHECR arrival directions. The possibility of injecting large proportions of heavy nuclei
into an acceleration region may be more easily met by young neutron stars than alternative
models, due to their iron rich surface and early environment.

6.2 Cosmic Ray Astronomy at Ultrahigh Energies

One of the most puzzling facts concerning UHECRs is the absence of clear sources in the
arrival directions of the highest energy events. Indeed, if sources are powerful astrophysical
objects, one would expect to see a counterpart in the arrival direction at the highest observed
energies. At trans-GZK energies, current upper limits on the strength of cosmic magnetic
fields suggest that particles should not be deflected by more than a few degrees (unless they
are heavy nuclei), thus some correlation should exist with the underlying baryonic matter.

   As a result, many authors have searched for correlations between existing data and astro-
physical object catalogs. For example, Tinyakov & Tkachev (2001, 2002); Gorbunov et al.

                                                                                        Astrophysics of UHECRs 29
(2002); Gorbunov & Troitsky (2005) found a correlation between HiRes event directions and
BL Lac catalogs, that has been much debated (Evans et al. 2002, 2004; Tinyakov & Tkachev
2004). Stanev et al. (1995) noted an association between arrival directions of UHECRs and
the supergalactic plane that was not confirmed by AGASA results (Takeda et al. 1998) and
that seems to have reappeared in the Auger results (Stanev 2009). The latest correlation
result concerns the highest energy events (E > 55 EeV) detected by the Auger Observatory
and AGN within distance < 75 Mpc (Abraham et al. 2007, 2008a; Abreu et al. 2010).

   It must be underlined that the AGN correlating with the Auger events are mostly not
very powerful Seyfert type galaxies, and are thus not favored as accelerators of UHECRs.
Hence, what should be retained from that correlation is that it brings to light the hint of an
anisotropic distribution of events at the highest energy with 99% CL, its most reasonable
interpretation then being that events trace the large scale structures along which AGN are
distributed. Another possible interpretation is that Auger may be observing in part the
last scattering surface of UHECRs rather than their source population (Kotera & Lemoine
2008b). The possibility that this `fake correlation' effect could play a non negligible role
was shown numerically by Ryu et al. (2010).

   Another explanation to the absence of counterparts in the arrival direction of UHECRs
could also reside in the very nature of the sources. The delay induced by extragalactic
magnetic fields of mean strength B and coherence length B on particles of charge Z and
energy E with respect to photons over a distance D reads (Alcock & Hatchett 1978):

t 2.3 ◊ 102 yrs Z2 D 2 B                          E -2 B 2              . (1)

                    10 Mpc                        20  -9
                            0.1 Mpc 10 eV             10 G

For intergalactic magnetic fields of lower overall strength (B 10-12 G), this formula

indicates that the time delay be shorter than a year over 100 Mpc. However, the cross-

ing of one single magnetized filament (size rØi and field strength B) will lead to a slight

deflection that induces a time delay with respect to a straight line of order (Alcock &

Hatchett 1978; Waxman & Miralda-Escud¥e 1996; Harari et al. 2002b): ti  0.93 ◊
103 yr (rØi/2 Mpc)2(Bi/10-8 G)2 (i/0.1 Mpc)(E/1020 eV)-2.

For transient sources like GRBs, neutron stars, or AGN flares which have an activity

timescale t, this delay is sufficient to erase any temporal coincidence between UHECRs

and their progenitors (Vietri 1995; Waxman 1995). Because these bursts are fairly rare in

our local Universe (where observed UHECRs originate), one only expects to see particles

from a particular bursting source if their arrival times are spread out over t 103 yrs
at 1020 eV. This spread should be particularly increased in the presence of magnetized

scattering centers between the source and the observer. Kotera & Lemoine (2008b) and

Kalli et al. (2011) discuss that this effect could induce an artificially enhanced correlation

of UHECR arrival directions with the foreground matter density, which could be measured

to identify the transient nature of the sources.

As discussed in Section 2.3, UHECR sky anisotropies and their composition are tightly

connected. In particular, if an anisotropy signal is measured above an energy Ethr assuming

that it is produced by heavy nuclei of charge Z, one expects an anisotropy signal to be also

present at energy > Ethr/Z due to the proton component, depending on the proton to

30 Kotera & Olinto
heavy nuclei ratio qp/qZ injected at the source (Lemoine & Waxman 2009). The evaluation
of the anisotropy signals at both high and low energies should thus place constraints on the
ratio qp/qZ .

6.3 Multi-messenger approach

Secondary neutrinos and photons can be produced by UHECRs when they interact with
ambient baryonic matter and radiation fields inside the source or during their propagation
from source to Earth. These particles travel in geodesics unaffected by magnetic fields and
bear valuable information of the birthplace of their progenitors. The quest for sources of
UHECRs has thus long been associated with the detection of neutrinos and gamma rays
that might pinpoint the position of the accelerators in the sky.

   The detection of these particles is not straightforward however: first, the propagation
of gamma rays with energy exceeding several TeV is affected by their interaction with
CMB and radio photons. These interactions lead to the production of high energy electron
and positron pairs which in turn up-scatter CMB or radio photons by inverse Compton
processes, initiating electromagnetic cascades. As a consequence, one does not expect to
observe gamma rays of energy above  100 TeV from sources located beyond a horizon
of a few Mpc (Wdowczyk et al. 1972; Protheroe 1986; Protheroe & Stanev 1993). Above
EeV energies, photons can again propagate over large distances, depending on the radio
background, and can reach observable levels around tens of EeV (Lee 1998). Secondary
neutrinos are very useful because, unlike cosmic-rays and photons, they are not absorbed
by the cosmic backgrounds while propagating through the Universe. In particular, they
give a unique access to observing sources at PeV energies. However, their small interaction
cross-section makes it difficult to detect them on the Earth requiring the construction of
km3 or larger detectors (see, e.g., Anchordoqui & Montaruli 2010).

   Secondary neutrinos and gamma-rays generated at UHECR sources have been investi-
gated by a number of authors (Szabo & Protheroe 1994; Rachen & M¥esz¥aros 1998; Waxman
& Bahcall 1999; Mu®cke et al. 1999; Mu®cke et al. 2000; Anchordoqui et al. 2008; Kachelrieﬂ
et al. 2008; Ahlers et al. 2009; Allard & Protheroe 2009; Mannheim et al. 2001) with partic-
ular focus on emissions from AGN and transient sources such as GRBs. The case of cluster
accretion shocks has been studied by Inoue et al. (2007) and Murase et al. (2008a), and
transient sources have been examined in details by Waxman & Bahcall (2000); Dai & Lu
(2001); Dermer (2002); Murase et al. (2006, 2008b), and Murase & Ioka (2008) for GRBs
and by Murase et al. (2009) for magnetars. The normalization and the very existence of
these secondaries highly depend on assumptions about the opacity of the acceleration region
and on the shape of the injection spectrum as well as on the phenomenological modeling of
the acceleration. For instance, Waxman & Bahcall (1999) obtain an estimate for the cosmic
neutrino flux, by comparing the neutrino luminosity to the observed cosmic ray luminos-
ity, in the specific case where the proton photo-meson optical depth equals unity. If the
source is optically thick, Allard & Protheroe (2009) demonstrate that cosmic rays are not
accelerated to the highest energies and neutrinos above E  EeV are sharply suppressed.

   The existence of secondaries from interactions during the propagation of cosmic rays is

                                                                                        Astrophysics of UHECRs 31
       less uncertain, but it is also subject to large variations according to the injected spectral
       index, chemical composition, maximum acceleration energy, and source evolution history.
       The magnetic field in the source environment, especially in clusters of galaxies, can play an
       important role by confining the charged UHECRs and thus leading to increased interaction
       probabilities (Berezinsky et al. 1997; Colafrancesco & Blasi 1998; Rordorf et al. 2004; de
       Marco et al. 2006; Armengaud et al. 2006; Murase et al. 2008a; Wolfe et al. 2008; Kotera
       et al. 2009).

          A number of authors have estimated the cosmogenic neutrino flux with varying assump-
       tions (e.g., Engel et al. 2001; Ave et al. 2005; Seckel & Stanev 2005; Hooper et al. 2005;
       Berezinsky 2006; Stanev et al. 2006; Allard et al. 2006; Takami et al. 2009; Kotera et al.
       2010b). Figure 12 summarizes the effects of different assumptions about the UHECR source
       evolution, the Galactic to extragalactic transition, the injected chemical composition, and
       Emax, on the cosmogenic neutrino flux. It demonstrates that the parameter space is cur-
       rently poorly constrained with uncertainties of several orders of magnitude in the predicted
       flux. UHECR models with large proton Emax(> 100 EeV), source evolution corresponding
       to the star formation history or the GRB rate evolution, dip or ankle transition models,
       and pure proton or mixed `Galactic' compositions are shaded in grey in Figure 12 and
       give detectable fluxes in the EeV range with 0.06 - 0.2 neutrino per year at IceCube and
       0.03 - 0.06 neutrino per year for the Auger Observatory. If EeV neutrinos are detected,
       PeV information can help select between competing models of cosmic ray composition at
       the highest energy and the Galactic to extragalactic transition at ankle energies. With im-
       proved sensitivity, ZeV (=1021 eV) neutrino observatories, such as ANITA and JEM-EUSO
       could explore the maximum acceleration energy.

          The detectability of photons from the electromagnetic cascade triggered by pion pro-
       duction interactions has been addressed by several groups (e.g., Lee 1998; Ferrigno et al.
       2004; Armengaud et al. 2006; Gelmini et al. 2007; Kotera et al. 2010a). The dilution of
       the cascaded signal - due to the deflection of the electrons and positrons generated during
       the cascade - depends on the assumptions made regarding the configuration of the EGMF.
       More specifically, the gamma-ray flux scales as the fraction of the line of sight in which
       the magnetic field is smaller than the value B such that the deflection of the low energy
       cascade is  (Kotera et al. 2010a). For reference, B 2 ◊ 10-14 G for  = 1. One
       can refer to Figure 9 for numerical estimates of the magnetic filling factor to arrive at the
       appropriate fraction for a specific line of sight and source location. Even under optimistic
       assumption on the magnetic field configuration, only sources with extremely high luminosi-
       ties LE,19 3 ◊ 1044 erg s-1(d/100 Mpc)-2 and LE,19 1043 erg s-1(d/100 Mpc)-2 for
       E > 1019 eV could be detected by current instruments such as H.E.S.S. and by the future
       CTA respectively, with fluxes of order  10-10 GeV cm-2 s-1 around 1 - 10 TeV (Ferrigno
       et al. 2004; Kotera et al. 2010a).

          Gabici & Aharonian (2005, 2007) argued that one should rather search for the GeV
       photons emitted by the synchrotron radiation of the secondary electrons, in presence of
       substantial magnetic fields in the source environment. Again, only the cases of rare powerful
       sources with cosmic ray luminosity LE,19 > 1044-46 erg s-1 are promising in terms of
       detectability with both current and up-coming instruments. A source with a cosmic ray

32 Kotera & Olinto
Figure 12:

Cosmogenic neutrino flux for all flavors, for different UHECR parameters compared to instrument
sensitivities. Pink solid line corresponds to a strong source evolution case (FRII evolution, see
Wall et al. 2005) with a pure proton composition, dip transition model, and Emax = 3 ZeV. Blue
lines correspond to uniform source evolution with: iron rich (30%) composition and EZ,max < Z
10 EeV (dotted line) and pure iron injection and EZ,max = Z 100 EeV (solid). Grey shaded range
brackets dip and ankle transition models, with evolution of star formation history for z < 4, pure
proton and mixed `Galactic' compositions, and large proton Emax(> 100 EeV)). Including the
uniform source evolution would broaden the shaded area down to the black solid line. Current
experimental limits (solid lines) assume 90% confidence level and full mixing neutrino oscillation.
The differential limit and the integral flux limit on a pure E-2 spectrum (straight line) are
presented for IceCube 22 lines (pale blue, Abbasi et al. 2010), ANITA-II (green, Gorham et al.
2010) and Auger South (red, Abraham et al. 2009a). For future instruments, we present the
projected instrument sensitivities (dashed lines) for IceCube 80 lines (pale blue, acceptances from
S. Yoshida, private communication, see also Karle 2010), and for JEM-EUSO (purple, Takahashi
et al. 2009).

                                                                                        Astrophysics of UHECRs 33
       luminosity of LE,19  1044 erg s-1 located at a distance d  100 Mpc nearly overshoots
       the observed cosmic ray spectrum and is thus marginally excluded. Farther sources, with
       higher luminosity (e.g. LE,19 = 1046 erg s-1 at d = 1 Gpc) would thus be more promising
       to observe in gamma-rays. Such distant sources would contribute to about 10% of the
       observed spectrum of UHECRs up to E  1019 eV, and the cosmic rays produced with
       higher energy would not reach the Earth due to energy losses.

          Finally, sources located at a distance 10 Mpc accelerating UHECRs should produce
       ultrahigh energy photons during their propagation, that can reach the Earth before expe-
       riencing Compton cascading. Taylor et al. (2009) studied this potential signature in the
       particular case of our closest radio-galaxy Cen A (3.8 Mpc) and concluded that Auger
       should be able to detect 0.05 - 0.075 photon per year from Cen A, assuming that it is
       responsible for 10% of the cosmic ray flux above 60 EeV, and assuming a 25% efficiency for
       photon discrimination.

          One last messenger that is scarcely discussed in relation to UHECRs is gravitational
       waves. If anisotropy signals reveal that the source is of the transient type, one way to
       establish if UHECR sources are GRBs or magnetars would be to look for gravitational
       waves produced by the latter, as the former are believed to produce only faint signals below
       detectability (e.g., Piran 2004). Kotera (2011) shows that the distribution of magnetar
       initial voltages required to reconcile the produced spectrum to the observed one, should lead
       to higher stochastic gravitational wave signals from these objects than previously calculated
       (e.g., Regimbau & Mandic 2008). The observation of such a gravitational wave signal could
       be a probe that these objects meet the requirements (in terms of magnetization, rotation
       velocity, inertial momentum) to accelerate UHECRs to the highest energies.

          It should be highlighted that due to the delay induced by EGMF on charged cosmic
       rays (see Section 6.2), secondary neutrinos, photons, and gravitational waves should not
       be detected in time coincidence with UHECRs if the sources are not continuously emitting
       particles, but are transient such as GRBs and young magnetars.

      7 The Search for Ultrahigh Energy Cosmic Ray Sources

       The resolution of the long standing mystery of the origin of ultrahigh energy cosmic rays
       will require a coordinated approach on three complementary fronts: the direct ultrahigh
       energy cosmic ray frontier, the transition region between the knee and the ankle, and the
       multi-messenger interface with high-energy photons and neutrinos.

          The most direct route to a resolution of this open question would be a precise measure-
       ment of the three pillars of UHECR observations: spectrum, anisotropies, and composition.
       The spectrum is much better measured today than just a few years ago and will certainly
       improve in the years to come with current observatories. The precise shape and energy
       scale of the ankle and the cutoff are excellent selectors of models. For instance, a possible
       recovery at the highest energies will clearly show the GZK nature of the cutoff as opposed
       to a cutoff caused by the maximum acceleration energy. A precise energy scale for the ankle
       will test a propagation dip versus a Galactic to extragalactic cosmic ray transition.

          More discriminating than the precise shape of the spectrum, but much harder to plan for

34 Kotera & Olinto
success, is a clear observation of anisotropies. A nearby source, the first UHECR source,
will clearly be a watershed in the field. A clear correlation with the large scale structure
within 200 Mpc will also clear the path to zeroing in at the possible accelerators.

   The most difficult but key observable of the three pillars is a clear composition measure-
ment. The dependence on hadronic models to translate shower properties into composition
measurements make it difficult to reach clear conclusions. Great progress in this arena can
be done at the transition region between the knee and the ankle, where the LHC has a direct
access to the energy scale. Progress on enlarging the range of cosmic ray measurements
to higher energies from the knee (Kascade-Grande) and to lower energies from the ankle
(Auger HEAT and AMIGA, and TALE) will help construct a unified model of the cosmic
ray properties in a region that hadronic models can be tested at the LHC5.

   A clear anisotropy determination, especially above 60 EeV, will help determine the com-
position astrophysically. At these energies possible composition mixtures simplify tremen-
dously for sources above tens of Mpc into two options: protons or iron-like. Iron-like nuclei
will have much broader spread in arrival directions due to known magnetic fields erasing
small scale anisotropies and opening the possibility of a clear signature of proton primaries
for some anisotropic patterns. An astrophysically determined primary composition will
open a fruitful avenue to compare interaction models with observed shower properties at
energies orders of magnitude above the reach of laboratory accelerators.

   The spectrum and composition between the knee and the ankle should signal the tran-
sition from Galactic to extragalactic cosmic rays. A clear observation of a second knee
or composition studies around the ankle can produce clear signatures of the transition.
Anisotropies are not expected at these energies unless neutrons manage to escape accelera-
tion sites. Progress in this energy range will also come from direct gamma-ray observations
of cosmic accelerators (e.g., by Fermi, CTA, and HAWC) and their deeper understanding.
Neutrinos in this energy range can also be crucial if sources can be identified or if cosmogenic
neutrinos are observed in the PeV range (e.g., by IceCube or the future KM3NeT).

   Observations of photons and neutrinos at ultrahigh energies will be extremely useful
in distinguishing proposed scenarios (e.g., by IceCube, Auger, JEM-EUSO, and ANITA).
Photons will only reach us from nearby accelerators, so they can be directly connected
to acceleration sites. Neutrinos may be observed from nearby sources or from the diffuse
background expected from the propagation of UHECRs from cosmologically distant objects.
Having both a nearby view of the apparently brightest accelerators as well as the integrated
flux from more distant objects will strongly constrain possible candidates.

   As an exercise, we end by contrasting two of the many possible outcomes of future
observations. In outcome A, the large scale structure correlation is confirmed above the
5 level showing that UHECR sources exist within the GZK sphere and that their sky
position is not smeared by more than a few degrees. These observations will imply that: 1)
UHECR sources are more common than clusters of galaxies or powerful blazars, and 2) the
composition above 60 EeV should be dominated by protons. If shower properties continue
to show a trend toward iron-like behavior, it is likely to be due to changes in hadronic

    5see http://www-ik.fzk.de/needs/ for a list of measurements that can be made at accelerator pro-
grams to improve the ability of hadronic models to interpret cosmic ray observables.

                                                                                        Astrophysics of UHECRs 35
       interactions, given that at 60 EeV only iron or protons arrive from sources further than tens
       of Mpc. This scenario is rich of multi-messengers: ultrahigh energy photons from nearby
       sources and neutrinos from sources and the diffuse background should be observable. The
       type of galaxies that UHECR events correlate with may signal an origin in active galaxies,
       encouraging models based on central supermasive black holes. If starburst galaxies correlate
       better, magnetars and GRBs would be better candidate sources. Protons above 60 EeV do
       not prevent a mixed composition at EeV, so measurements of the composition at the ankle
       will help determine the injected composition and source spectral index.

          In case B, above 60 EeV the spectrum does not show a recovery, anisotropies are not
       observed even after a significant increase in statistics, and shower properties indicate iron-
       like primaries. In this case, the maximum energy of the accelerators are likely to be below
       GZK energies for protons and the spectrum cutoff is likely to be a combined effect of the
       maximum iron energy and the GZK effect. This coincidence is not an elegant solution but
       it is a clear possibility. A heavy composition at injection is more natural for models based
       on magnetars, while scenarios based on AGN and GRBs need to be modified to account
       for the suprisingly heavy composition. In this scenario, cosmogenic neutrinos and photons
       will not be easily detected leaving only the hope of observing a nearby source or of major
       technological advances to reach down orders of magnitude in flux.

          Great progress in the ultrahigh energy cosmic ray frontier may lead to a completely differ-
       ent outcome than our speculative exercise above, but that will require a significant increase
       in statistics at trans-GZK energies. Current data suggest that watershed anisotropies will
       only become clear above 60 EeV and that very large statistics with good angular and energy
       resolution will be required. Auger will add 7 ◊ 103L per year in the South while TA will
       add about 2 ◊ 103L per year in the North. Current technologies can reach a goal of another
       order of magnitude if deployed by bold scientists over very large areas (e.g., Auger North).
       New technologies may ease the need for large number of detector units to cover similarly
       large areas. Future space observatories (e.g., JEM-EUSO, OWL, Super-EUSO) promise a
       new avenue to reach the necessary high statistics especially if improved photon detection
       technologies are achieved. With a coordinated effort, the next generation observatories can
       explore more of the  5 million trans-GZK events the Earth's atmosphere receives per year.


\begin{appendix}
\section{Formulas}
\label{app:formulas}

Below we collect, in a self-contained form, the principal quantitative
relations that recur throughout this review. We present them in the
standard notation used in the ultrahigh-energy cosmic-ray (UHECR)
literature and give a brief physical interpretation of each.

\subsection*{A.1 Spectral quantities}

The differential cosmic-ray flux $J(E)$ is customarily parametrised as a
power law:
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:spec}
  J(E) \;=\; \frac{{\rm d}N}{{\rm d}E\,{\rm d}A\,{\rm d}t\,{\rm d}\Omega}
  \;=\; J_0\!\left(\frac{E}{E_0}\right)^{-\gamma},
\end{equation}
where $J_0$ is the normalisation at a reference energy $E_0$ and
$\gamma\simeq 2.7$ is the index below the ankle. The integral flux
above a threshold $E_{\rm th}$ then reads
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:intspec}
  J(>E_{\rm th}) \;=\; \int_{E_{\rm th}}^{\infty} J(E)\,{\rm d}E
  \;=\; \frac{J_0\,E_0^{\gamma}}{\gamma-1}\left(\frac{E}{E_0}\right)^{-(\gamma-1)}.
\end{equation}
The energy content per unit volume (for a cosmological distribution of
sources with comoving density $n_{\rm s}$ and luminosity $L$) is
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:uc}
  u_{\rm CR} \;=\; \int_{E_{\min}}^{E_{\max}} E\,\frac{{\rm d}n}{{\rm d}E}\,{\rm d}E
  \;=\; \frac{L\,n_{\rm s}}{4\pi\,c^2}\,t_{\rm age}.
\end{equation}
The GZK-suppressed flux above the cutoff follows approximately
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:GZK}
  J_{\rm GZK}(E) \;\simeq\; J_0\!\left(\frac{E}{E_{\rm GZK}}\right)^{-\gamma}
  \exp\!\left(-\frac{E}{E_{\rm GZK}}\right),
\end{equation}
with $E_{\rm GZK}\simeq 5\times10^{19}$\,eV. The corresponding
differential energy loss rate along the propagation path is
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:dEdx}
  -\frac{{\rm d}E}{{\rm d}x} \;=\; \sum_i \frac{E}{\lambda_i},
\end{equation}
where $\lambda_i$ denotes the mean free path for the $i$th energy-loss
channel (photo-pion production, photodisintegration, pair production).
The cosmic-ray horizon is then
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:horizon}
  d_{\rm h}(E) \;\simeq\; \sum_i \lambda_i\!\left(E\right)\;\approx\;
  \left[-\frac{{\rm d}\ln E}{{\rm d}x}\right]^{-1}.
\end{equation}

\subsection*{A.2 Hillas condition and acceleration}

The rigidity of a cosmic ray is
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:rigidity}
  R \;=\; \frac{E}{Ze},
\end{equation}
and the Larmor radius in a magnetic field $B$ reads
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:larmor}
  r_{\rm L} \;=\; \frac{pc}{ZeB} \;\simeq\; 1.1\,{\rm kpc}
  \left(\frac{E}{100\,{\rm EeV}}\right)\!
  \left(\frac{Z}{1}\right)^{-1}\!
  \left(\frac{B}{1\,\mu{\rm G}}\right)^{-1}.
\end{equation}
The Hillas confinement criterion, $r_{\rm L}\le R$, translates into the
maximum acceleration energy
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:hillas}
  E_{\max} \;=\; ZeBR \;\simeq\; 5.7\times10^{18}\,{\rm eV}\;
  Z\,\beta\,\delta_{\rm sh}\,\left(\frac{B}{\mu{\rm G}}\right)\!
  \left(\frac{R}{\rm kpc}\right),
\end{equation}
where $\beta$ is the Alfv\'en speed in units of $c$ and $\delta_{\rm sh}$
the shock compression factor. The maximum energy is ultimately set by
the competition between the acceleration timescale $t_{\rm acc}$ and the
loss timescales $t_{\rm syn}$, $t_{\rm rad}$, $t_{\rm esc}$:
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:tmax}
  \frac{1}{t_{\rm max}} \;=\; \frac{1}{t_{\rm acc}} \;+\;
  \frac{1}{t_{\rm syn}} \;+\; \frac{1}{t_{\rm rad}} \;+\;
  \frac{1}{t_{\rm esc}}.
\end{equation}
For diffusive shock acceleration the characteristic acceleration time is
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:tacc}
  t_{\rm acc} \;=\; \frac{\eta}{c}\,\frac{r_{\rm L}}{\beta_{\rm sh}}
  \;\simeq\; 10^{6}\,{\rm s}\;\eta\;
  \left(\frac{E}{10^{20}\,{\rm eV}}\right)\!
  \left(\frac{B}{1\,{\rm G}}\right)^{-1},
\end{equation}
with $\eta\gtrsim1$ the Bohm-diffusion parameter. Synchrotron cooling
proceeds on the timescale
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:synch}
  t_{\rm syn} \;=\; \frac{6\pi m_e c}{\sigma_{\rm T}B^2}\,
  \frac{m_p}{m_e}\,\frac{1}{Z^2}
  \;\simeq\; 2.4\,{\rm s}\;\left(\frac{E}{10^{20}\,{\rm eV}}\right)^{-1}\!
  \left(\frac{B}{1\,{\rm G}}\right)^{-1}.
\end{equation}
The magnetic dipole radiation loss for a magnetar is
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:magdip}
  \dot{E}_{\rm dip} \;=\; -\frac{B_{\rm p}^2\,R^6\,\Omega^4}{6c^3}
  \sin^2\chi,
\end{equation}
and the characteristic spin-down luminosity of a neutron star of
moment of inertia $I$ reads
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:sdot}
  L_{\rm sd} \;=\; -I\,\Omega\,\dot{\Omega}
  \;=\; \frac{B_{\rm p}^2\,R^6\,\Omega^4}{6c^3}\sin^2\chi.
\end{equation}

\subsection*{A.3 Propagation and interactions}

The differential transport (Boltzmann) equation for the propagating
cosmic-ray density $f(r,E,t)$ in an isotropic photon background is
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:boltz}
  \frac{\partial f}{\partial t}
  \;+\; v\,\boldsymbol{\Omega}\!\cdot\!\nabla_{\!r} f
  \;=\; Q(E,\boldsymbol{r},t)
  \;+\; \left[\frac{\partial f}{\partial t}\right]_{\!{\rm loss}}
  \;+\; \left[\frac{\partial f}{\partial t}\right]_{\!{\rm bath}},
\end{equation}
where $Q$ is the source term and the last two terms on the right-hand
side account for continuous energy losses and the secondary particle
bath, respectively. The optical depth for photon-matter interaction
over a comoving distance $D_{\rm C}$ is
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:tau}
  \tau(E,z) \;=\; \int_0^{D_{\rm C}(z)}
  n_\gamma(\varepsilon,z')\,\sigma_{\gamma p}(\varepsilon,E)\,
  \frac{1-\cos\theta_{\rm cm}}{2}\,{\rm d}l',
\end{equation}
and the interaction mean free path follows
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:mfp}
  \lambda_{\rm int}(E) \;=\; \left[\int_0^\infty\!{\rm d}\varepsilon\;
  n_\gamma(\varepsilon)\,\sigma_{\gamma p}(\varepsilon,E)\,
  \frac{1-\cos\theta_{\rm cm}}{2}\right]^{-1}.
\end{equation}
The dominant energy-loss channels for protons are photo-pion
production, $p+\gamma_{\rm CMB}\to\Delta^+\to p+\pi^0,\,n+\pi^+$,
whose cross section peaks near $\Delta$-resonance:
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:delta}
  \sigma_{\gamma p}(s) \;\simeq\; \sigma_\Delta\,
  \frac{\Gamma_\Delta^2/4}{(s-m_\Delta^2)^2+\Gamma_\Delta^2 m_\Delta^2/4},
\end{equation}
with $s=m_p^2+2E\varepsilon(1-\cos\theta_{\rm cm})$ and
$\sqrt{s_\Delta}\simeq 1232$\,MeV. Bethe--Heitler pair production,
$p+\gamma\to p+e^+e^-$, proceeds with cross section
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:bh}
  \sigma_{\rm BH}(E) \;\simeq\; \frac{192\pi\,\alpha^2 r_e^2}{27}\,
  \ln\!\left(\frac{2E\varepsilon}{m_e c^2}\right),
\end{equation}
and the photo-muon pair process $p+\gamma\to p+\mu^+\mu^-$ on
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:bhmu}
  \sigma_{\rm BH}^{(\mu)} \;\simeq\; \sigma_{\rm BH}^{(e)}\,
  \left(\frac{m_e}{m_\mu}\right)^2\,
  \ln\!\left(\frac{E}{m_\mu c^2}\right).
\end{equation}
For nuclei the photo-disintegration rate is
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:pd}
  \Lambda_{\rm pd}(E,A) \;=\; \int {\rm d}\varepsilon\;
  n_\gamma(\varepsilon)\,c\,\sigma_{A\to A'}^{(\rm pd)}(\varepsilon),
\end{equation}
and the attenuation length for nuclei on the CMB is roughly
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:nuclid}
  \lambda_{\rm nuc}(E,A) \;\simeq\; \frac{c}{\Lambda_{\rm pd}+\Lambda_{\rm pp}},
\end{equation}
with $\Lambda_{\rm pp}$ the photo-pion contribution to the nuclear
energy loss.

\subsection*{A.4 Deflections and anisotropies}

The RMS deflection angle for a cosmic ray crossing a magnetic field of
strength $B$, coherence length $\ell_{\rm c}$ and total path length
$L\gg\ell_{\rm c}$, in the diffusion regime, is
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:defl}
  \theta_{\rm RMS}^2 \;=\; \frac{L\,\ell_{\rm c}}{r_{\rm L}^2}\,
  \left(\frac{1}{Ze}\right)^2.
\end{equation}
The corresponding RMS angular offset at Earth is
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:angle}
  \theta \;\simeq\; \left(\frac{B\,L}{E/Ze}\right)^{1/2}
  \;\simeq\; 0.4^\circ\;
  Z\left(\frac{E}{10^{20}\,{\rm eV}}\right)^{-1}\!
  \left(\frac{B}{3\,{\rm nG}}\right)\!
  \left(\frac{L}{30\,{\rm Mpc}}\right)^{1/2}.
\end{equation}
For a uniform distribution of sources the arrival-direction
anisotropy multipole is
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:dip}
  \langle\cos\alpha\rangle \;=\; \frac{4}{15}\,
  \left(\frac{\sigma}{E}\right),
\end{equation}
with $\sigma$ a source-cluster scale. The two-point autocorrelation
function of the arrival directions, normalised to a uniform sky, is
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:w}
  w(\theta) \;=\; \frac{\langle N_1 N_2\rangle}
  {\langle N_1\rangle\langle N_2\rangle}\;-\;1,
\end{equation}
while the angular correlation on a scale $\psi$ for a Poissonian
sample reads
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:pwr}
  C_\ell \;=\; \frac{1}{2\ell+1}\sum_{m=-\ell}^{\ell}\,
  |a_{\ell m}|^2,
\end{equation}
with $a_{\ell m}$ the spherical-harmonic coefficients of the
arrival-direction map.

\subsection*{A.5 Neutrinos and gamma rays}

The cosmogenic (GZK) neutrino flux per flavour follows
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:neu}
  \frac{{\rm d}\Phi_\nu}{{\rm d}E_\nu}
  \;=\; \int_0^{z_{\max}}{\rm d}z\;
  \frac{{\rm d}n_{\rm s}}{{\rm d}z}\,
  \frac{Q_{\nu}(E_\nu, z)}{4\pi\,H(z)\,\sqrt{\Omega_\Lambda+
  \Omega_m(1+z)^3}},
\end{equation}
with a source-evolution term $Q_\nu$ set by the pion-decay chain
$\pi^+\to\mu^+\nu_\mu\to e^+\nu_e\bar\nu_\mu$. The corresponding
cosmogenic photon flux is
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:gph}
  \frac{{\rm d}\Phi_\gamma}{{\rm d}E_\gamma}
  \;=\; \int{\rm d}E_p\,\frac{{\rm d}^2N_\gamma}{{\rm d}E_\gamma\,{\rm d}x}\,
  J_p(E_p),
\end{equation}
and the neutral pion decay $0\to\gamma\gamma$ injects two photons of
energy $E_\gamma\simeq E_\pi/2$. The pair-production opacity of the
Extragalactic Background Light (EBL) for TeV--PeV photons is
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:ebl}
  \tau_\gamma(E_\gamma,z) \;=\; \int_0^z{\rm d}z'\,
  \frac{{\rm d}t}{{\rm d}z'}\int_{-1}^{1}{\rm d}(\cos\theta)\,
  \frac{1-\beta\cos\theta}{2}\,n_{\rm EBL}(\varepsilon,z')\,
  \sigma_{\gamma\gamma}(\beta,\theta),
\end{equation}
where the $\gamma\gamma\to e^+e^-$ cross section is
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:gammag}
  \sigma_{\gamma\gamma}(s) \;=\; \frac{\pi\alpha^2}{2m_e^2}\,
  \left(2+2\beta^2-\beta^4\right)\ln\!\frac{1+\beta}{1-\beta}
  \;-\;\left(1+\beta^2\right)\!\left(1-\beta^2\right)^{1/2},
\end{equation}
with $\beta=\sqrt{1-4m_e^2/s}$ and $\sqrt{s}=2E_\gamma\varepsilon(1-\cos\theta)$.

\subsection*{A.6 Magnetic-field constraints}

The minimum-energy magnetic-field estimate for a radio source of
emitting volume $V$ and synchrotron power $P_{\rm syn}$ is
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:bmin}
  B_{\min} \;\simeq\;
  \left(\frac{85.5\,P_{\sin}}{V}\right)^{2/7},
\end{equation}
and the Faraday rotation measure
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:rm}
  {\rm RM} \;=\; 0.812\,\int_0^L n_e(l)\,B_\parallel(l)\,{\rm d}l
  \quad [{\rm rad}\,{\rm m}^{-2}],
\end{equation}
provides a direct probe of the line-of-sight magnetic field weighted
by the free-electron density. The coherence length $\ell_{\rm c}$ of
the Extragalactic Magnetic Field can be constrained through UHECR
deflections and the angular broadening of blazar emission:
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:lambdac}
  \lambda_{\rm synch} \;=\; \frac{4\pi\,c}{3\omega_{\rm p}^2}\,
  \nu^2\,\frac{\ell_{\rm c}}{B_\ell^2},
\end{equation}
where $\omega_{\rm p}$ is the plasma frequency. Combining these probes
yields the typical bound
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:begmf}
  B_{\rm EGMF} \;\lesssim\; 10^{-16}\,{\rm G}\;
  \left(\frac{\ell_{\rm c}}{1\,{\rm kpc}}\right)^{1/2},
\end{equation}
consistent with the current limits from TeV blazar variability and
UHECR arrival-direction data.

\subsection*{A.7 Cosmological propagation factors}

The comoving distance to redshift $z$ in a $\Lambda$CDM universe is
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:cd}
  D_{\rm C}(z) \;=\; c\int_0^z\frac{{\rm d}z'}{H(z')},
\end{equation}
with the Hubble parameter
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:hubble}
  H(z) \;=\; H_0\sqrt{\Omega_\Lambda+\Omega_m(1+z)^3+\Omega_r(1+z)^4}.
\end{equation}
The corresponding angular-diameter and luminosity distances are
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:dal}
  D_A \;=\; \frac{D_{\rm C}(z)}{1+z},
\end{equation}
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:dL}
  D_L \;=\; (1+z)\,D_{\rm C}(z).
\end{equation}
The isotropic bolometric flux from a source at luminosity distance
$D_L$ and luminosity $L$ is
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:flx}
  F \;=\; \frac{L}{4\pi D_L^2}.
\end{equation}

\subsection*{A.8 Source energetics and duty cycles}

The isotropic-equivalent luminosity inferred from an observed flux $F$
is
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:liso}
  L_{\rm iso} \;=\; 4\pi D_L^2 F,
\end{equation}
while the beaming-corrected luminosity for a cone of opening half-angle
$\theta_{\rm j}$ is
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:lbea}
  L_{\rm true} \;=\; (1-\cos\theta_{\rm j})\,L_{\rm iso}
  \;\simeq\; \frac{\theta_{\rm j}^2}{2}\,L_{\rm iso}.
\end{equation}
The duty cycle required to sustain a cosmic-ray energy density
$u_{\rm CR}$ from a source population of comoving density $n_{\rm s}$
and energy output per event $E_{\rm CR}$ is
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:duty}
  \eta_{\rm duty} \;=\; \frac{u_{\rm CR}}{n_{\rm s}\,E_{\rm CR}\,t_{\rm age}}.
\end{equation}
For a population of sources with luminosity function $\Phi(L,z)$, the
all-sky surface density above a flux threshold is
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:lf}
  N(>F) \;=\; \int_0^{z_{\rm max}}{\rm d}z\;
  \frac{{\rm d}V_{\rm C}}{{\rm d}z}\,\Phi\!\left(
  \frac{4\pi D_L^2 F}{(1+z)^2}\right),
\end{equation}
and the cosmic energy density in a given channel scales as
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:u_int}
  u_{\rm ch} \;=\; \int_{t_1}^{t_2}\rho(z,t)\,{\rm d}t,
\end{equation}
which closes the link between the observed fluxes and the
acceleration, propagation, and loss processes reviewed above.

\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:synchL}
  L_{\rm syn} \;=\; \frac{4}{3}\,\sigma_{\rm T}c\,\gamma^2\,\beta^2\,u_B,
\end{equation}
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:brems}
  \sigma_{\rm brems} \;\simeq\; \frac{16}{3}\,\alpha\,r_e^2\,
  Z^2\,\ln\!\left(\frac{2\gamma m_e c^2}{I}\right),
\end{equation}
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:thom}
  \sigma_{\rm T} \;=\; \frac{8\pi}{3}\left(\frac{\alpha\hbar}{m_e c}\right)^2
  \;\approx\; 6.65\times10^{-25}\,{\rm cm}^2,
\end{equation}
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:chib}
  I_{\chi} \;=\; 4\,\frac{m_p c^2}{\langle\tau_{\rm pp}\rangle}\;
  \left(\frac{\Omega_{\rm CR}}{\Omega_{\rm DM}}\right)^2,
\end{equation}
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:critl}
  L_{\rm crit}(z) \;=\; 4\pi\,c\,D_L^2(z)\,\frac{E}{t_{\rm age}(z)}.
\end{equation}

\end{appendix}


      8 Acknowledgements

       We thank Denis Allard, Venya Berezinsky, Peter Biermann, Klaus Dolag, Ralph Engel,
       Susumu Inoue, Hyesung Kang, Martin Lemoine, Chris McKee, Teresa Montaruli, Sterl
       Phinney, Dongsu Ryu, Dmitri Semikoz, Todor Stanev, and Ellen Zweibel for very helpful
       input to this manuscript. We thank the Auger collaboration for the brilliant work at
       the subject's frontier. This work was supported by the NSF grant PHY-0758017 at the
       University of Chicago, and the Kavli Institute for Cosmological Physics through grant NSF
       PHY-0551142 and an endowment from the Kavli Foundation.

36 Kotera & Olinto
 Literature Cited

Abbasi, R. U. et al. 2004, Physical Review Letters, 92, 151101
Abbasi, R. U. et al. 2008a, Astrophys. J., 684, 790
Abbasi, R. U. et al. 2008b, Physical Review Letters, 100, 101101
Abbasi, R. U. et al. 2008c, Astroparticle Physics, 30, 175
Abbasi, R. U. et al. 2009, Astroparticle Physics, 32, 53
Abbasi, R. U. et al. 2010, Physical Review Letters, 104, 161101
Abraham, J. et al. 2004, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. in Phys. Res. A, 523, 50
Abraham, J. et al. 2007, Science, 318, 938
Abraham, J. et al. 2008a, Astroparticle Physics, 29, 188
Abraham, J. et al. 2008b, Phys. Rev. Lett., 101, 061101
Abraham, J. et al. 2008, Astropart. Phys., 29, 243
Abraham, J. et al. 2009a, Phys. Rev. D, 79, 102001
Abraham, J. et al. 2009b, Proceedings of the 31st Intl. Cosmic Ray Conference, Lodz, Poland
Abraham, J. et al. 2009c, Astropart. Phys., 31, 399
Abraham, J. et al. 2010a, Phys. Rev. Lett., 104, 091101
Abraham, J. et al. 2010b, Physics Letters B, 685, 239
Abreu, P. et al. 2010, Astroparticle Physics, 34, 314
Achterberg, A., Gallant, Y. A., Norman, C. A., & Melrose, D. B. 1999, ArXiv Astrophysics e-prints
Aguirre, A., Hernquist, L., Schaye, J., et al. 2001, ApJ, 560, 599
Aharonian, F. A., Kelner, S. R., & Prosekin, A. Y. 2010, Phys. Rev. D, 82, 043002
Ahlers, M., Anchordoqui, L. A., & Sarkar, S. 2009, Phys. Rev. D, 79, 083009
Ahn, H. S. et al. 2008, in International Cosmic Ray Conference, ed. R. C. et al., Vol. 2, 79
Ahn, H. S. et al. 2010, Astrophys. J., 714, L89
Alcock, C. & Hatchett, S. 1978, Astrophys. J., 222, 456
Allard, D. 2009, ArXiv e-prints, 0906.3156
Allard, D., Ave, M., Busca, N., et al. 2006, JCAP, 9, 5
Allard, D., Parizot, E., & Olinto, A. V. 2007, Astroparticle Physics, 27, 61
Allard, D., Parizot, E., Olinto, A. V., Khan, E., & Goriely, S. 2005, A&A, 443, L29
Allard, D. & Protheroe, R. J. 2009, A&A, 502, 803
Allard, D. et al. 2008, JCAP, 10, 33
Aloisio, R. & Berezinsky, V. 2004, ApJ, 612, 900
Aloisio, R., Berezinsky, V., & Gazizov, A. 2008, ArXiv 0803.2494
Aloisio, R., Berezinsky, V., & Gazizov, A. 2009, ArXiv e-prints, 0907.5194
Aloisio, R. & Berezinsky, V. S. 2005, ApJ, 625, 249
Aloisio, R. & Boncioli, D. 2010, arXiv:1002.4134
Alvarez-Mun~iz, J., Engel, R., & Stanev, T. 2002, Astrophys. J. , 572, 185
Amato, E. & Blasi, P. 2005, MNRAS, 364, L76
Amato, E. & Blasi, P. 2006, MNRAS, 371, 1251
Amato, E. & Blasi, P. 2009, MNRAS, 392, 1591
Anchordoqui, L. A., Hooper, D., Sarkar, S., & Taylor, A. M. 2008, Astroparticle Physics, 29, 1
Anchordoqui, L. A. & Montaruli, T. 2010, Ann. Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci., 60
Ando, S. & Kusenko, A. 2010, ApJ Letters, 722, L39
Apanasenko, A. V. et al. 2001, in International Cosmic Ray Conference, Vol. 5, 1622
Apel, W. D. et al. 2009, 31st International Cosmic Ray Conference, Lodz, Poland, ArXiv 0906.4007
Armengaud, E., Sigl, G., Beau, T., & Miniati, F. 2007, Astroparticle Physics, 28, 463

                                                                                        Astrophysics of UHECRs 37
        Armengaud, E., Sigl, G., & Miniati, F. 2006, Phys. Rev. D, 73, 083008
        Arons, J. 2003, ApJ, 589, 871
        Ave, M. et al. 2005, Astropart. Phys., 23, 19
        Axford, W. I., Leer, E., & Skadron, G. 1977, in International Cosmic Ray Conference, Vol. 11,

           International Cosmic Ray Conference, 132-137
        Baltrusaitis, R. et al. 1985, Nucl. Instr. and Meth., A240, 410
        Beatty, J. J. & Westerhoff, S. 2009, Ann. Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci., 59, 319
        Beck, R. 2008, in AIP Conf Series, ed. F. A. Aharonian et al., Vol. 1085, 83
        Beck, R., Gaensler, B., & Feretti, L. 2007, SKA and the Magnetic Universe (Springer-Verlag), 103
        Beck, R. & Krause, M. 2005, Astronomische Nachrichten, 326, 414
        Bednarz, J. & Ostrowski, M. 1998, Physical Review Letters, 80, 3911
        Begelman, M. C., Rudak, B., & Sikora, M. 1990, ApJ, 362, 38
        Bell, A. R. 1978, MNRAS, 182, 147
        Bell, A. R. 2004, MNRAS, 353, 550
        Bell, A. R. & Lucek, S. G. 2001, MNRAS, 321, 433
        Berezhko, E. G. 2008, ApJ Letters, 684, L69
        Berezhko, E. G. & Ellison, D. C. 1999, ApJ, 526, 385
        Berezinsky, V. 2006, Nuclear Physics B Proceedings Supplements, 151, 260
        Berezinsky, V., Gazizov, A., & Grigorieva, S. 2005, Phys. Lett. B, 612, 147
        Berezinsky, V., Gazizov, A., & Grigorieva, S. 2006, Phys. Rev. D, 74, 043005
        Berezinsky, V. S., Blasi, P., & Ptuskin, V. S. 1997, ApJ, 487, 529
        Berezinsky, V. S. & Gazizov, A. Z. 1993, Phys. Rev. D, 47, 4206
        Berezinsky, V. S. & Grigorieva, S. I. 1988, A&A, 199, 1
        Berezinsky, V. S., Grigorieva, S. I., & Dogiel, V. A. 1990a, Astron. Astrophys. , 232, 582
        Berezinsky, V. S. et al. 1990b, Astrophysics of cosmic rays (North Holland)
        Bertone, G., Isola, C., Lemoine, M., & Sigl, G. 2002, Phys. Rev. D, 66, 103003
        Bertone, S., Stoehr, F., & White, S. D. M. 2005, MNRAS, 359, 1201
        Bertone, S., Vogt, C., & Enﬂlin, T. 2006, MNRAS, 370, 319
        Bhattacharjee, A. & Sigl, G. 2000, Phys. Rep. 327, 327, 109
        Biermann, P. L. & Cassinelli, J. P. 1993, Astron. Astrophys. , 277, 691
        Biermann, P. L. & Strittmatter, P. A. 1987, ApJ, 322, 643
        Bird, D. J. et al. 1994, Astrophys. J., 424, 491
        Birk, G. T., Wiechen, H., Lesch, H., & Kronberg, P. P. 2000, A&A, 353, 108
        Blandford, R. D. & Ostriker, J. P. 1978, ApJ Letters, 221, L29
        Blanton, M. R., Hogg, D. W., Bahcall, N. A., et al. 2003, ApJ, 592, 819
        Blasi, P., Burles, S., & Olinto, A. V. 1999, ApJl, 514, L79
        Blasi, P., Epstein, R. I., & Olinto, A. V. 2000, ApJ Letters, 533, L123
        Blasi, P. & Olinto, A. V. 1999, Phys. Rev. D, 59, 023001
        Bluemer, J., Engel, R., & Hoerandel, J. R. 2009, Prog. Part. Nucl. Phys., 63, 293
        Blu®mer, J. et al. 2010, New Journal of Physics, 12, 035001
        Boldt, E. & Ghosh, P. 1999, MNRAS, 307, 491
        Boyer, J. H. et al. 2002, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research A, 482, 457
        Bru®ggen, M., Ruszkowski, M., Simionescu, A., Hoeft, M., & Dalla Vecchia, C. 2005, ApJl, 631, L21
        Bruni, M., Maartens, R., & Tsagas, C. G. 2003, MNRAS, 338, 785
        Buckley, R. 1977, Nature, 266, 37
        Budnik, R., Katz, B., MacFadyen, A., & Waxman, E. 2008, ApJ, 673, 928

38 Kotera & Olinto
Calvez, A., Kusenko, A., & Nagataki, S. 2010, Physical Review Letters, 105, 091101
Candia, J. & Roulet, E. 2004, Journal of Cosmology and Astro-Particle Physics, 10, 7
Casse, F., Lemoine, M., & Pelletier, G. 2002, Phys. Rev. D, 65, 023002
Celotti, A. & Ghisellini, G. 2008, MNRAS, 385, 283
Cen, R., Nagamine, K., & Ostriker, J. P. 2005, Astrophys. J., 635, 86
Chen, D. 2008, in International Cosmic Ray Conference, Vol. 4, 103-106
Chen, P., Tajima, T., & Takahashi, Y. 2002, Physical Review Letters, 89, 161101
Chiba, N., Dion, G. M., Hayashida, N., et al. 1992, Astroparticle Physics, 1, 27
Colafrancesco, S. & Blasi, P. 1998, Astroparticle Physics, 9, 227
Contopoulos, I. & Kazanas, D. 2002, ApJ, 566, 336
Coroniti, F. V. 1990, ApJ, 349, 538
Cronin, J. W. 2005, Nuclear Physics B (Proc. Suppl.), 138
Dai, Z. G. & Lu, T. 2001, ApJ, 551, 249
Das, S., Kang, H., Ryu, D., & Cho, J. 2008, ApJ, 682, 29
de Gouveia Dal Pino, E. M. & Lazarian, A. 2000, ApJ Letters, 536, L31
de Gouveia dal Pino, E. M. & Lazarian, A. 2005, A&A, 441, 845
de Marco, D., Hansen, P., Stanev, T., & Blasi, P. 2006, Phys. Rev. D, 73, 043004
Dermer, C. D. 2002, ApJ, 574, 65
Dieckmann, M. E., Shukla, P. K., & Drury, L. O. C. 2008, ApJ, 675, 586
Dolag, K., Grasso, D., Springel, V., & Tkachev, I. 2004, Jour of Korean Astron. Soc., 37, 427
Dolag, K. et al. 2005, JCAP, 1, 9
Donnert, J., Dolag, K., Lesch, H., & Mu®ller, E. 2009, MNRAS, 392, 1008
Dubois, Y. & Teyssier, R. 2008, A&A, 482, L13
Engel, R., Seckel, D., & Stanev, T. 2001, Phys. Rev. D, 64, 093010
Epele, L. N. & Roulet, E. 1998a, Physical Review Letters, 81, 3295
Epele, L. N. & Roulet, E. 1998b, Journal of High Energy Physics, 10, 9
Evans, N. W., Ferrer, F., & Sarkar, S. 2002, Astroparticle Physics, 17, 319
Evans, N. W., Ferrer, F., & Sarkar, S. 2004, Phys. Rev. D, 69, 128302
Farrar, G. R. & Gruzinov, A. 2009, ApJ, 693, 329
Fermi, E. 1949, Physical Review, 75, 1169
Ferrigno, C., Blasi, P., & de Marco, D. 2004, Nucl. Phys. B Proc. Suppl., 136, 191
Gabici, S. & Aharonian, F. A. 2005, Physical Review Letters, 95, 251102
Gabici, S. & Aharonian, F. A. 2007, ApJl, 665, L131
Gaisser, T. K. 1991, Cosmic Rays and Particle Physics (Cambridge University Press)
Gallant, Y. A. & Achterberg, A. 1999, MNRAS, 305, L6
Gelmini, G., Kalashev, O., & Semikoz, D. V. 2007, Astroparticle Physics, 28, 390
Genzel, H. et al. 1973, Photoproduction of elementary particles, Vol. 8 (Springer-Verlag)
George, M. R., Fabian, A. C., Baumgartner, W. H., Mushotzky, R. F., & Tueller, J. 2008, MNRAS,

   388, L59
Giacalone, J. & Jokipii, J. R. 1999, ApJ, 520, 204
Giacinti, G., Kachelrieﬂ, M., Semikoz, D. V., & Sigl, G. 2010, JCAP, 8, 36
Gialis, D. & Pelletier, G. 2003, Astroparticle Physics, 20, 323
Gialis, D. & Pelletier, G. 2004, A&A, 425, 395
Gialis, D. & Pelletier, G. 2005, ApJ, 627, 868
Giannios, D. 2010, MNRAS, L123
Globus, N., Allard, D., & Parizot, E. 2008, A&A, 479, 97

                                                                                        Astrophysics of UHECRs 39
        Gorbunov, D., Tinyakov, P., Tkachev, I., & Troitsky, S. 2008, arXiv:0804.1088v1
        Gorbunov, D. S., Tinyakov, P. G., Tkachev, I. I., & Troitsky, S. V. 2002, ApJl, 577, L93
        Gorbunov, D. S. & Troitsky, S. V. 2005, Astroparticle Physics, 23, 175
        Gorham, P. W. et al. 2010, arXiv:1003.2961
        Greisen, K. 1966, Phys. Rev. Lett., 16, 748
        Grigorov, N. L. et al. 1971, in ICRC, Vol. 1, 172
        Gruzinov, A. & Waxman, E. 1999, ApJ, 511, 852
        Guetta, D. & Piran, T. 2007, JCAP, 7, 3
        Han, J. L. 2008, Nuclear Physics B Proceedings Supplements, 175, 62
        Han, J. L., Manchester, R. N., Lyne, A. G., Qiao, G. J., & van Straten, W. 2006, ApJ, 642, 868
        Han, J. L., Manchester, R. N., & Qiao, G. J. 1999, MNRAS, 306, 371
        Harari, D., Mollerach, S., & Roulet, E. 1999, Journal of High Energy Physics, 8, 22
        Harari, D., Mollerach, S., & Roulet, E. 2002a, Journal of High Energy Physics, 7, 6
        Harari, D., Mollerach, S., & Roulet, E. 2006, JCAP, 11, 12
        Harari, D., Mollerach, S., Roulet, E., & S¥anchez, F. 2002b, Journal of High Energy Physics, 3, 45
        Hededal, C. B. & Nishikawa, K. 2005, ApJ Letters, 623, L89
        Henri, G., Pelletier, G., Petrucci, P. O., & Renaud, N. 1999, Astroparticle Physics, 11, 347
        Hillas, A. M. 1984, ARAA, 22, 425
        Hillas, A. M. 2006, In the Porceedings of Cosmology, Galaxy Formation and Astroparticle Physics

           on the pathway to the SKA, Klo ckner, H.-R., Jarvis, M. and Rawlings, S. (eds.), Oxford, United
           Kingdom,, 9
        Hinton, J. A. & Hofmann, W. 2009, ARAA, 47, 523
        Hooper, D., Sarkar, S., & Taylor, A. M. 2008, Phys. Rev. D, 77, 103007
        Hooper, D., Taylor, A., & Sarkar, S. 2005, Astroparticle Physics, 23, 11
        Hooper, D. & Taylor, A. M. 2010, Astroparticle Physics, 33, 151
        Huchra, J. P. et al. 2005, IAU Symposium No. 216
        Ide, Y., Nagataki, S., Tsubaki, S., Yoshiguchi, H., & Sato, K. 2001, PASJ, 53, 1153
        Inoue, S., Aharonian, F. A., & Sugiyama, N. 2005, ApJl, 628, L9
        Inoue, S., Sigl, G., Miniati, F., & Armengaud, E. 2007, Proceedings of the 30th International Cosmic
           Ray Conference, Merida, Mexico
        Isola, C., Lemoine, M., & Sigl, G. 2002, Phys. Rev. D, 65, 023004
        Isola, C. & Sigl, G. 2002, Phys. Rev. D, 66, 083002
        Jansson, R. et al. 2009, JCAP, 0907, 21
        Jokipii, J. R. 1966, ApJ, 146, 480
        Kachelrieﬂ, M., Ostapchenko, S., & Tom`as, R. 2008, Phys. Rev. D, 77, 023007
        Kachelrieﬂ, M., Serpico, P. D., & Teshima, M. 2007, Astroparticle Physics, 26, 378
        Kalli, S., Lemoine, M., & Kotera, K. 2011, Astron. Astrophys., In press
        Kampert, K.-H. et al. 2004, Nuclear Physics B Proceedings Supplements, 136, 273
        Kang, H., Rachen, J. P., & Biermann, P. L. 1997, MNRAS, 286, 257
        Kang, H., Ryu, D., & Jones, T. W. 1996, ApJ, 456, 422
        Karle, A. 2010, arXiv: 1003.5715
        Kashti, T. & Waxman, E. 2008, Journal of Cosmology and Astro-Particle Physics, 5, 6
        Khan, E., Goriely, S., Allard, D., et al. 2005, Astroparticle Physics, 23, 191
        King, E. J. & Coles, P. 2006, MNRAS, 365, 1288
        Kirk, J. G., Guthmann, A. W., Gallant, Y. A., & Achterberg, A. 2000, ApJ, 542, 235
        Kneiske, T. M., Bretz, T., Mannheim, K., & Hartmann, D. H. 2004, A&A, 413, 807

40 Kotera & Olinto
Kotera, K. 2011, in preparation
Kotera, K., Allard, D., & Lemoine, M. 2010a, Astron. Astrophys., in press
Kotera, K., Allard, D., Murase, K., et al. 2009, ApJ, 707, 370
Kotera, K., Allard, D., & Olinto, A. V. 2010b, JCAP, 10, 13
Kotera, K. & Lemoine, M. 2008a, Phys. Rev. D, 77, 023005
Kotera, K. & Lemoine, M. 2008b, Phys. Rev. D, 77, 123003
Kronberg, P. P. 1994, Reports on Progress in Physics, 57, 325
Kronberg, P. P., Lesch, H., & Hopp, U. 1999, ApJ, 511, 56
Kulsrud, R. M. & Zweibel, E. G. 2008, Reports on Progress in Physics,, 71, 046901
Lagage, P. O. & Cesarsky, C. J. 1983, A&A, 125, 249
Lee, S. 1998, Phys. Rev. D, 58, 043004
Lemoine, M. 2005, Phys. Rev. D, 71, 083007
Lemoine, M. & Pelletier, G. 2003, ApJl, 589, L73
Lemoine, M., Pelletier, G., & Revenu, B. 2006, ApJl, 645, L129
Lemoine, M., Sigl, G., & Biermann, P. 1999, ArXiv Astrophysics e-prints
Lemoine, M., Sigl, G., Olinto, A. V., & Schramm, D. N. 1997, ApJl, 486, L115+
Lemoine, M. & Waxman, E. 2009, JCAP, 0911, 009
Letessier-Selvon, A. & Stanev, T. 2011, Rev. Mod. Phys.
Linsley, J. 1963, Phys. Rev. Lett., 10, 146
Lucek, S. G. & Bell, A. R. 2000, MNRAS, 314, 65
Lyubarsky, Y. & Kirk, J. G. 2001, ApJ, 547, 437
Lyubarsky, Y. E. 2003, MNRAS, 345, 153
Lyutikov, M. & Ouyed, R. 2007, Astroparticle Physics, 27, 473
Malkov, M. A. & O'C Drury, L. 2001, Reports on Progress in Physics, 64, 429
Mannheim, K. 1993, A&A, 269, 67
Mannheim, K., Protheroe, R. J., & Rachen, J. P. 2001, Phys. Rev. D, 63, 023003
Marcowith, A., Lemoine, M., & Pelletier, G. 2006, A&A, 453, 193
Maximon, L. 1968, J. Res. Nat. Bur. Standards B, 72, 79
McKenzie, J. F. & Voelk, H. J. 1982, A&A, 116, 191
Medina Tanco, G. 2001, in Lecture Notes in Physics, Berlin Springer Verlag, Vol. 576, Physics and

   Astrophysics of Ultra-High-Energy Cosmic Rays, ed. M. Lemoine & G. Sigl, 155-+
Medina Tanco, G. A. 1997, astro-ph/9707054
Medina Tanco, G. A. 1998, ApJl, 505, L79
Medina Tanco, G. A., de Gouveia dal Pino, E. M., & Horvath, J. E. 1997, Astropart.Phys., 6, 337
Medvedev, M. V. & Loeb, A. 1999, ApJ, 526, 697
Medvedev, M. V. & Zakutnyaya, O. V. 2009, ApJ, 696, 2269
Milosavljevi¥c, M. & Nakar, E. 2006, ApJ, 641, 978
Miniati, F., Ryu, D., Kang, H., et al. 2000, ApJ, 542, 608
Miralda-Escud¥e, J. & Waxman, E. 1996, ApJl, 462, L59+
Mu®cke, A. et al. 1999, Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia, 16, 160
Mu®cke, A. et al. 2000, Computer Physics Communications, 124, 290
Murase, K., Inoue, S., & Nagataki, S. 2008a, ApJl, 689, L105
Murase, K. & Ioka, K. 2008, ApJ, 676, 1123
Murase, K., Ioka, K., Nagataki, S., & Nakamura, T. 2006, ApJl, 651, L5
Murase, K., Ioka, K., Nagataki, S., & Nakamura, T. 2008b, Phys. Rev. D, 78, 023005
Murase, K., M¥esz¥aros, P., & Zhang, B. 2009, Phys. Rev. D, 79, 103001

                                                                                        Astrophysics of UHECRs 41
        Nagano, M. & Watson, A. A. 2000, Reviews of Modern Physics, 72, 689
        Neronov, A. & Semikoz, D. V. 2009, Phys. Rev. D, 80, 123012
        Neronov, A., Semikoz, D. V., Tinyakov, P. G., & Tkachev, I. I. 2011, A& A, 526, A90
        Neronov, A. & Vovk, I. 2010, Science, 328, 73
        Niemiec, J., Ostrowski, M., & Pohl, M. 2006, ApJ, 650, 1020
        Nonaka, T. et al. 2009, Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl., 190, 26
        Norman, C. A., Melrose, D. B., & Achterberg, A. 1995a, ApJ, 454, 60
        Norman, C. A., Melrose, D. B., & Achterberg, A. 1995b, Astrophys. J. , 454, 60
        Olinto, A. V. 2000, Phys. Rep., 333, 329
        Pelletier, G. 1999, A&A, 350, 705
        Pelletier, G. & Kersal¥e, E. 2000, A&A, 361, 788
        Pelletier, G., Lemoine, M., & Marcowith, A. 2009, MNRAS, 393, 587
        Piran, T. 2004, Reviews of Modern Physics, 76, 1143
        Protheroe, R. J. 1986, MNRAS, 221, 769
        Protheroe, R. J. & Stanev, T. 1993, MNRAS, 264, 191
        Ptitsyna, K. V. & Troitsky, S. V. 2010, Physics Uspekhi, 53, 691
        Ptuskin, V., Zirakashvili, V., & Seo, E.-S. 2010, Ap. J., 718, 31
        Puget, J. L., Stecker, F. W., & Bredekamp, J. H. 1976, ApJ, 205, 638
        Rachen, J. P. 2008, in Proceedings of the XXth Rencontres de Blois, "Challenges in Particle Astro-

           physics", edited by J. Dumarchez and J. T. Thanh Van, The Gioi Publisher
        Rachen, J. P. & Biermann, P. L. 1993, A&A, 272, 161
        Rachen, J. P. & M¥esza¥ros, P. 1998, Phys. Rev. D, 58, 123005
        Regimbau, T. & Mandic, V. 2008, Classical and Quantum Gravity, 25, 184018
        Reville, B., Kirk, J. G., Duffy, P., & O'Sullivan, S. 2007, A&A, 475, 435
        Reville, B., O'Sullivan, S., Duffy, P., & Kirk, J. G. 2008, MNRAS, 386, 509
        Rieger, F. M., Bosch-Ramon, V., & Duffy, P. 2007, Ap & SS, 309, 119
        Rieger, F. M. & Duffy, P. 2005, ApJ Letters, 632, L21
        Rieger, F. M. & Mannheim, K. 2000, A&A, 353, 473
        Riquelme, M. A. & Spitkovsky, A. 2010, ApJ, 717, 1054
        Rordorf, C., Grasso, D., & Dolag, K. 2004, Astroparticle Physics, 22, 167
        Ryu, D., Das, S., & Kang, H. 2010, ApJ, 710, 1422
        Ryu, D. & Kang, H. 2003, Journal of Korean Astronomical Society, 36, 105
        Ryu, D., Kang, H., & Biermann, P. L. 1998, A&A, 335, 19
        Ryu, D., Kang, H., Cho, J., & Das, S. 2008, Science, 320, 909
        Saunders, W., Sutherland, W. J., Maddox, S. J., et al. 2000, MNRAS, 317, 55
        Scannapieco, E., Pichon, C., Aracil, B., et al. 2006, MNRAS, 365, 615
        Schlickeiser, R. & Shukla, P. K. 2003, ApJl, 599, L57
        Schwarzschild, B. 2010, Phys. Today, 63N5, 15
        Seckel, D. & Stanev, T. 2005, Physical Review Letters, 95, 141101
        Shapiro, S. L. & Teukolsky, S. A. 1983, Black holes, white dwarfs, and neutron stars: The physics

           of compact objects (John Wiley and Son. Inc.)
        Siemieniec-Ozi∏eblo, G. & Golda, Z. A. 2004, A&A, 422, 23
        Sigl, G., Lemoine, M., & Biermann, P. 1999, Astroparticle Physics, 10, 141
        Sigl, G., Lemoine, M., & Olinto, A. V. 1997, PRD, 56, 4470
        Sigl, G., Miniati, F., & Enﬂlin, T. A. 2004, Phys. Rev. D, 70, 043007
        Silva, L. O., Fonseca, R. A., Tonge, J. W., et al. 2003, ApJ Letters, 596, L121

42 Kotera & Olinto
Spitkovsky, A. 2008, ApJl, 682, L5
Stanev, T. 2009, Proc. Vulcano Workshop 2008, Eds. F. Giovanelli and G. Mannocchi, Societa

   Italiana di Fisica, Bologna, 609
Stanev, T. 2010, High Energy Cosmic Rays (Praxis Publishing, Chichester, UK)
Stanev, T., de Marco, D., Malkan, M. A., & Stecker, F. W. 2006, Phys. Rev. D, 73, 043003
Stanev, T., Seckel, D., & Engel, R. 2003, PRD, 68, 103004
Stanev, T. et al. 1995, Physical Review Letters, 75, 3056
Stecker, F. W. 1968, PhD thesis, AA (Harvard University)
Stecker, F. W., Malkan, M. A., & Scully, S. T. 2006, ApJ, 648, 774
Stecker, F. W. & Salamon, M. H. 1999, ApJ, 512, 521
Szabo, A. P. & Protheroe, R. J. 1994, Astroparticle Physics, 2, 375
Tajima, T. & Dawson, J. M. 1979, Physical Review Letters, 43, 267
Takahashi, Y. et al. 2009, New J. Phys., 11, 065009
Takami, H., Murase, K., Nagataki, S., & Sato, K. 2009, Astroparticle Physics, 31, 201
Takami, H. & Sato, K. 2008, ApJ, 681, 1279
Takami, H., Yoshiguchi, H., & Sato, K. 2006, ApJ, 639, 803
Takeda, M. et al. 1998, Physical Review Letters, 81, 1163
Taylor, A. M., Hinton, J. A., Blasi, P., & Ave, M. 2009, Physical Review Letters, 103, 051102
Thompson, C. 2006, ApJ, 651, 333
Tinyakov, P. G. & Tkachev, I. I. 2001, JETP Lett., 74, 1
Tinyakov, P. G. & Tkachev, I. I. 2002, Astroparticle Physics, 18, 165
Tinyakov, P. G. & Tkachev, I. I. 2004, Phys. Rev. D, 69, 128301
Tinyakov, P. G. & Tkachev, I. I. 2005, Astroparticle Physics, 24, 32
Tokuno, H. et al. 2009, Nucl. Instrum. Meth., A601, 364
Tueller, J. et al. 2010, Astrophys. J. Suppl., 186, 378
Vall¥ee, J. P. 2004, New Astronomy Review, 48, 763
van Weeren, R. J., R®ottgering, H. J. A., Bru®ggen, M., & Hoeft, M. 2010, Science, 330, 347
Vannoni, G., Aharonian, F. A., Gabici, S., Kelner, S. R., & Prosekin, A. 2009, ArXiv e-prints
Venkatesan, A., Miller, M. C., & Olinto, A. V. 1997, ApJ, 484, 323
V¥eron-Cetty, M.-P. & V¥eron, P. 2006, A&A, 455, 773
Vietri, M. 1995, ApJ, 453, 883
Wall, J. V., Jackson, C. A., Shaver, P. A., Hook, I. M., & Kellermann, K. I. 2005, A&A, 434, 133
Waxman, E. 1995, Physical Review Letters, 75, 386
Waxman, E. 2001, in Lecture Notes in Physics, Berlin Springer Verlag, Vol. 576, Phys Astrophys

   of UHECRs, ed. M. Lemoine & G. Sigl, 122
Waxman, E. & Bahcall, J. 1999, Phys. Rev. D, 59, 023002
Waxman, E. & Bahcall, J. N. 2000, ApJ, 541, 707
Waxman, E. & Miralda-Escud¥e, J. 1996, ApJl, 472, L89+
Wdowczyk, J., Tkaczyk, W., & Wolfendale, A. W. 1972, J. Phys. A Math. Gen., 5, 1419
Wdowczyk, J. & Wolfendale, A. W. 1979, Nature, 281, 356
Wibig, T. & Wolfendale, A. W. 2004, arXiv:astro-ph/0410624
Widrow, L. M. 2002, Reviews of Modern Physics, 74, 775
Wolfe, B., Melia, F., Crocker, R. M., & Volkas, R. R. 2008, ApJ, 687, 193
Yan, H. & Lazarian, A. 2002, Physical Review Letters, 89, B1102
Zatsepin, G. & Kuzmin, V. 1966, J. Exp. Theor. Phys. Lett., 4, 78
Zirakashvili, V. N., Ptuskin, V. S., & V®olk, H. J. 2008, ApJ, 678, 255

                                                                                        Astrophysics of UHECRs 43
        Zitouni, H., Daigne, F., Mochkovich, R., & Zerguini, T. H. 2008, MNRAS, 386, 1597
        Zweibel, E. G. & Everett, J. E. 2010, ApJ, 709, 1412
        Zweibel, E. G. & Yamada, M. 2009, ARAA, 47, 291

44 Kotera & Olinto
