Nucleosynthesis, neutrino bursts
and y-rays from coalescing
neutron stars

David Ejichler*, Mario Liviot, Tsvi Pirant
& David N. Schramm§

* Department of Physics, Ben Gurion University, Beer Sheva, Israel, and
Astronomy Program, University of Maryland, College Park,

Maryland 20742, USA

+ Department of Physics, The Technion, Haifa, Israel

+ Racah Institute for Physics, Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel, and
Princeton University Observatory, Princeton, New Jersey 08544, USA

§ Departments of Physics and Astrophysics, University of Chicago,
5640 Ellis Avenue, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA,

and NASA/Fermilab Astrophysics Center, Batavia,

Illinois 60510, USA

NEUTRON-STAR collisions occur inevitably when binary neutron
stars spiral into each other as a result of damping of gravitational
radiation. Such collisions will produce a characteristic burst of
gravitational radiation, which may be the most promising source
of a detectable signal for preposed gravity-wave detectors’. Such
signals are sufficiently unique and robust for them to have been
proposed as a means of determining the Hubble constant’.
However, the rate of these neutron-star collisions is highly uncer-
tain®. Here we note that such events should also synthesize neutron-
rich heavy elements, thought to be formed by rapid neutron capture
(the r-process)*. Furthermore, these collisions should produce
neutrino bursts® and resultant bursts of y-rays; the latter should
comprise a subclass of observable y-ray bursts. We argue that
observed r-process abundances and y-ray-burst rates predict rates
for these collisions that are both significant and consistent with
other estimates.

The binary pulsar system will coalesce in roughly 10° yr. Using
this fact together with the pulsar birth rate and the observed
frequency of occurrence of close binary pulsars (then, one in
every 300 pulsars), Clark et al* estimated the formation rate in
the Galaxy to be (3+1.6)x10* yr '. As 450 pulsars have now
been observed, this estimate should be decreased by a factor of
1.5, but this does not change the following discussion. The
natural progenitor for a close neutron-star binary system is a
massive X-ray binary, from which the neutron-star binary will
form following a supernova explosion. Clark et al* estimated
that the probability of disruption of such a close binary in the

126

supernova of the secondary is 0.1-0.2, and this led them to a
formation rate consistent with that based on pulsar statistics.

Alternatively, neutron stars formed in separate events might
become associated in a dense globular cluster®’. Such modes
of formation will lead to roughly equal-mass binaries with both
neutron stars of mass 1.4 Mo.

On the other hand, were there to exist a separate class of
neutron-star binaries in which the stars are in close proximity
on formation of the binary, these might escape detection because
they would decay on a short timescale, 7,,, via gravitational
radiation. For example, it has been suggested recently® that
millisecond pulsars arise from accretion-induced collapse of
white dwarfs in binaries’. It is argued on statistical grounds®
that low-mass X-ray binaries are too rare to be the progenitors
of millisecond pulsars, as had been proposed previously®. As
the white dwarfs are likely to be spun up to maximum angular
momentum, the collapse to a neutron star is likely to ‘fizzle’,
leading to two neutron stars in orbit around each other’. It is
not unlikely that the two neutron stars would have significantly
different masses. Although the statistical arguments have been
criticized (F. Verbunt, J. van Paradijs and W. Lewin, personal
communication), such criticism does not exclude the possibility
that close neutron-star binaries are indeed formed from white
dwarfs in globular clusters.

Essentially for all equations of state, the less massive
component (the secondary) has a larger radius’®, R. As it also
has the smaller Roche-lobe radius, R,, it is invariably this
lighter component that fills its tidal lobe first, following
which mass transfer ensues. If {;=(@In R,/ain M,)> f=
(aln R,/aIn M,) the mass transfer is dynamically stable,
whereas for Z, < ¢, itis unstable. The latter situation arises when
the secondary (‘donor’) neutron star has a mass that is compar-
able to or only slightly smaller than that of the larger, whereas
a high initial mass ratio will result in a stable mass-stripping
process.

Clark and Eardley’ have discussed the evolution of a close
neutron-star binary. In systems that are unstable to mass transfer
on a dynamical timescale, the margin by which the less massive
neutron star is the first to overfill its lobe grows until the orbital
evolution is dominated by mass exchange (rather than by gravi-
tational radiation), for which the timescale’! Ar., is ~6 ms for
masses of M,=1.4 Mo, M,=1.2 Mo. Once the mass-transfer
timescale becomes shorter than the gravitational-radiation
timescale, mass loss accelerates rapidly. In a three-dimensional
simulation of this process for a doubly degenerate binary system,
it is found that the lighter component is completely dissipated
in a little more than two orbital periods (~4 ms in our case).

NATURE - VOL 340 - 13 JULY 1989

© 1989 Nature Publishing Group

LETTERS TO NATURE

The secondary is transformed into a thick, axially symmetric
disk orbiting around the primary. Such configurations for the
case of a white-dwarf binary have been constructed recently”.
In the calculation of Benz et al.'*, about 0.3% of the total mass
escaped the system. A similar fraction can be expected in our
case, because this fraction depends mainly on the surface
potentials of the two stars and is thus proportional to
(1— M)R,/M,R)).

Calculations'”? have shown that, for the white-dwarf binary,
the collapse does not occur immediately even though the total
mass exceeds the Chandrasekhar mass, mainly because the
system is supported by centrifugal forces (stability is also indi-
cated by the ratio of kinetic to gravitational energy). Thus, the
late-stage evolution of the configuration depends critically on
transport and disposal of angular momentum from the disk. If
transport of angular momentum occurs entirely by means of
degenerate matter viscosity'*, then extremely long viscous time-
scales result. The value of the Reynolds number indicates,
however, that turbulence may arise in a significant fraction of
the disk'*. In this case, the relevant viscosity may be the turbulent
viscosity

Yrurp = (2x 10° cm? s')( V,/108 cm s~)(1,/ 10° cm)(Re,/ 5,000)",

where |, and V, are the typical size and velocity of a turbulent
cell and Re, is the critical Reynolds number. Such a turbulent
disk will transport angular momentum on a timescale

Tyis = 500( R/10° cm)?( 4.4/2 x 10° cm? s~!)7' s.

If the binary is stable (¢,> ¢,.) against dynamical-timescale
mass transfer (that is, if the initial mass ratio is large), the
mass-transfer rate, M,, will approach asymptotically a value
dictated essentially by gravitational radiation’?: M,~
—2M,/(¢— 1) t,,. This accretion rate is enormous and it raises
again the question of how angular momentum is disposed of
and of whether the accreting neutron star has the ability to
accommodate such a large mass influx. In the case of stable
mass transfer there is another interesting possibility. Neutron
stars have a minimum mass below which they are unstable to
free expansion. In the present context, the secondary may be
stripped to this minimum mass before colliding with the more
massive component, at which stage it will explode'®'*.

An interesting feature of the decompression of the secondary
is the accompanying de-neutronization of the material. One
expects the neutrons to aggregate into large droplets, in the
same way as they do in decompressed water'””°. Assuming that
the difference in Fermi energies of the neutron and proton in
the neutron-rich nuclei is of the order of a few MeV, the B-decay
timescale is of the order of a few milliseconds near the neutron
drip line (where neutron-rich nuclei are no longer able to capture
or retain additional neutrons), which is comparable to the
decompression timescale. Hence the de-neutronization is non-
adiabatic. This has two important implications. First, decom-
pression can occur while the nuclei are far from the B-decay
instability, and thus the nuclei may undergo rapid neutron
capture**'. It has been pointed out!'®° that such a process can
produce r-process nuclei in the observed mass range with abund-
ance peaks corresponding to the neutron ‘magic’ numbers”.
This is particularly interesting because these abundance peaks
are observed to be quite narrow and to be distinct from the
corresponding s-process abundance peaks. More conventional
r-process models involving supernova explosions require fine
tuning of temperature and neutron densities throughout many
different dynamical events in order to produce such sharp
peaks***, We see, however, that neutron-star decompression
may give rise to sharp peaks as a consequence of the intrinsic
nuclear physics rather than having to rely on hydrodynamic
concordance throughout different events.

Neutron capture is extremely rapid and throughout most of
the decompression the nuclei remain very close to the neutron
drip line. However, because the B-decay timescale is then

NATURE - VOL 340 - 13 JULY 1989

comparable to the expansion timescale, radioactivity causes
significant heating, so that the temperature may be of the order
of 1 MeV throughout most of the decompression phase and the
actual neutron excess may be somewhat below that of the
zero-temperature neutron drip line, as required by the location
of the r-process peaks.

Furthermore, antineutrinos should be emitted at energies of
up to a few MeV. The B-decay states are usually excited states
with energies again of a few MeV, and rapidly emit y-ray
cascades as they decay to stable states.

In a close neutron-star binary, the larger neutron star accretes
most of its companion over a dynamical timescale of ~10~* s,
liberating energy at a rate of ~10°* erg s_', and copious neutrino
emission is expected. The rate of mass infall onto the primary
is within an order of magnitude of that expected from spherically
symmetric core collapse, so the neutrino spectrum which is
buffered by energy-dependent interaction cross-sections, should
resemble the (now measured) burst from a core collapse. Note
that in the coalescing case the matter in the envelope is hotter
than in the isolated core collapse and it is therefore easier for
the neutrinos to diffuse. The neutrino diffusion timescale is of
the order of 1s, but because the distribution of infalling material
is biased towards the orbital plane, neutrinos may escape out
of the plane on a significantly shorter timescale. A total energy
output of ~10° erg is expected from the accretion process, a
sixth of which is due to electron neutrinos (unfortunately, such
neutrinos cannot be detected with existing detectors beyond
~100kpc). An energy of ~10°' erg is expected from antine-
utrinos that result from the de-neutronization of the companion
during its decompression.

The electron neutrinos from the accreting primary and the
antineutrinos from the disrupted secondary can produce elec-
tron-positron pairs where they collide out of the orbital plane.
The efficiency with which antineutrinos are converted is
roughly”?

€~7xX10af[(a,,/10°“ cm?)(E,/10 MeV)"]

x [es 10°? erg)

6 -1 -1
eA 8) Veo em) °(7/0.1s)

where g,, is the cross-section for vy >e*e , E, is the total energy
emitted in neutrinos, E, is the average energy of a neutrino; R
is the size of the region in which the neutrino flux is large and
tr is the duration of the neutrino burst; a is a geometrical factor
that depends on the geometry of the neutrinosphere and f is
the filling factor of the system.

The total energy converted to e*e™ pairs and, ultimately, the
time profiles of the neutrino emission make this estimate of ¢
rather uncertain. The energy of the primary y-ray cascades
accompanying the -decay antineutrinos should be within an
order of magnitude of this total energy, that is, =10°° erg.

A comparable or larger y-ray flux might be produced from
pair production by vi pairs emerging from, say, opposite sides
of the primary because, although the geometry is less favourable,
the greater total energy and the greater compactness may more
than compensate. Here the key uncertainty concerns the matter
that presumably envelopes the more massive neutron star as it
accretes onto it. Because this matter is intensely heated by its
own radioactivity, we cannot draw too many parallels with
previously catastrophic-mass-transfer models. In order that the
‘y-rays emerge before complete degradation, they must be pro-
duced beyond the accretion column, and this may require too
small an intersection angle between the neutrino and antineu-
trino trajectories to sustain a centre-of-mass energy much above
2 m.c?.

The y-ray fireball has such a large compactness parameter
that any soft photons produced within are Compton-upscattered
and kinetic equilibrium is attained with the remaining pairs.
The fireball is optically thick for temperatures T> 10° K, and
e*e pairs are produced. The fireball will expand until most of

127

© 1989 Nature Publishing Group

LETTERS TO NATURE

the pairs have annihilated irreversibly, and it then becomes
optically thin. Although the photons are redshifted during the
expansion in the frame of the co-moving fluid, the bulk
expansion at the onset of transparency causes a blueshift in the
frame of the observer by the same factor. The overall spectrum
will be a modified black-body spectrum with the same tem-
perature as initially but with fewer hard photons*°. A large
uncertainty in the end result of this process stems from the
potential appearance of a thick baryonic wind. If a large amount
of baryonic matter is mixed in with the fireball, most of the
available energy will be used in accelerating it and the y-ray
signal will then not be so strong.

For a luminosity of 10°’ ergs ' emitted from a region of size
2x10’ cm, the temperature of the region is ~10° K. The spec-
trum and timescale should be similar to those of a typical y-ray
burst. As the Universe is transparent to soft y-rays””**, it should
be detectable to distances of ~100 Mpc with fluences typical of
y-ray bursts (10*eVcm~’), if the energy output is ~10* erg.
However, we do not expect such radiation to have cyclotron
absorption features, nor a significant non-thermal tail above
several MeV. These two features are relatively common for y-ray
bursts, so that the scenario we propose can explain only a subset
of them, that is, ‘featureless’ y-ray bursts. Such featureless bursts
would be extragalactic and thus isotropic. Statistics on feature-
less y-ray bursts may thus provide an estimate of the rates of
neutron-star coalescence events.

In numerical models of cataclysmic mass transfer, a small
fraction (~0.3% ) of the transferred mass is expelled to infinite
distances. It is possible that radioactive heating, which can
supply an energy of ~3x 107° Mc’, can cause most of the
disrupted star to explode and escape to infinity. There is
~10° Mo per galaxy of material produced by the r-process, and
a few times 10° Mo of the heavy r-process material that might
be favoured in this type of event. If we assume that ~0.3% of
the mass is ejected per event, then such events should occur at
a rate of 3 x 10° to 3 x 10’ times per galaxy per Hubble time (the
lower limit applies if we wish to explain the heavy r-process
material in this way and the upper limit applies if we wish to
explain all r-processed material). These rates bracket the rate
obtained by Clark et al? of 3x 107‘ events per year per galaxy.
If a subset of these events is also to be able to account for
millisecond pulsars, then we require only about 10°° events per
year, or 10° per galaxy per Hubble time. Here we have assumed
an average spin-down time for a typical millisecond pulsar of
10° years, and that there are currently about 10* millisecond
pulsars in our Galaxy.

This scenario makes two simple observational predictions.
First, assuming that ~10° galaxies are within 100 Mpc and that
the bursts are indeed detectable out to that distance, then an
occurrence of ~10~“* per galaxy per year yields a detection rate
of 10 per year. With the oriented scintillation spectrometer
experiment on the Gamma Ray Observatory, it will be relatively
straightforward to distinguish featureless, highly thermal y-ray
bursts from others. Should such a class be identified, we suggest
that it would be worthwhile to check for identifications of such
bursts with galaxies. Second, gravitational-radiation events of
this nature should be detectable with a 300 signal up to a
distance of 100 Mpc and with a 3o@ signal up to a distance of
1,000 Mpc by the proposed Caltech-MIT Gravitational Wave
Detector’. The rate of stronger events should be comparable to
that of y-ray bursts of this kind, and the coincidence of such
‘y-ray bursts with gravity waves may in fact provide the most
stringent observational test of the scenario. Verification would
imply that our model identifies the site of the astrophysical
r-process.

Received 20 March; accepted 20 May 1989.

1. Clark, J. P. A. & Eardley, D. M. Astrophys. J 215, 311-322 (1977).
2. Shutz,B. F. in Gravitational Collapse and Gravity (eds Sato, H. & Nakamura, T.) 246-253 (Singapore
World Scientific, 1986).

128

. Clark, J. P. A., van den Heuvel, E. P. J. & Sutantyo, W. Astr. Astrophys. 72, 120-128 (1979).

. Lattimer, J. & Schramm, D. N. Astrophys. J 210, 549-556 (1976).

. Berezinsky, V. & Pritutski, P. Proc. 19th Int. Cosmic Ray Conf. 1, 29-32 (La Jolla, 1985).

. Grindlay, J. E. & Bailyn, C. D. Nature 336, 48-50 (1988).

. Ostriker, J. P. Sources of Gravitational Radiation (ed. Smarr, L. L.) 461-476 (Cambridge University

Press, 1979).

Alpar, M. A., Cheng, A. F., Ruderman, M. A. & Shaham, J. Nature 300, 728-730 (1982).

. Clark, J. P. A. Sources of Gravitational Radiation (ed. Smarr, L. L.) 447-459 (Cambridge University

Press, 1979).

10. Arnett, W. D. & Bowers, R. L. Astrophys. J Suppi. 33, 415-436 (1977).

141. Webbnik, R. F. Astrophys. 4 277, 355-360 (1984).

12. Mochkovitch, R. & Livio, M. Astr. Astrophys. 209, 111-118 (1989).

13. Benz, W., Bowers, R. L., Cameron, A. G. W. & Press, W. H. Astrophys. J (in the press).

14. Itoh, N., Kohyama, Y. & Takenchi, H. Astrophys. J 317, 733-736 (1987).

15. Webbink, R. F. & iben, |. Jr in {AU Collog. 95, The Second Conference on Faint Blue Star (eds
Davis Philip, A. G., Hayes, D. S. & Liebert, J. W. 778 (L. Davis Press, Schenectady, 1987).

16. Page, D. N. Phys. Lett. A 91, 201-202 (1982).

17. Shapiro, S. in Numerical Astrophysics (eds Centrella, J, Leblanc, J. & Bowers, R.} 190, 215
(Bertlett, Boston, 1985).

18. Colpi, M., Shapiro, S. L. & Teukolsky, S. A. Astrophys. J (in the press).

19. Lattimer, J. M., Mackie, F., Ravenhall, D. G. & Schramm, D. N. Astrophys. 4 213, 225-233 (1977).

20. Meyer, B. Astrophys. J (in the press).

21. Symbalisty, E. M. D. & Schramm, D. N. Astrophys. Lett. 22, 132-145 (1982).

22. Burbidge, E. M., Burbidge, C. A.. Fowler, W. A. & Hoyle, F. Rev. mod. Phys. 29, 547-650 (1957).

23. Norman, E. & Schramm, D. N. Astrophys. J 228, 881-892 (1979).

24. Cameron, A. G. W., Cowan, J. & Truran, J. in Nucleosynthesis {eds Arnett, W. D. & Truran, J.)
190-201 (University of Chicago Press, 1985).

25. Berezinsky, V. & Prilutski, F. Proc. 20th int. Cosmic Ray Conf. 1, 54-68 (Moscow, 1987).

26. Goodman, J. Astrophys. 4 308, L47-L50 (1986).

27. Babul, A., Paczynski, B. & Spergel, D. N. Astrophys. J 316, L49-L54 (1987).

28. Shapiro, S. L. & Teukolsky, S. A. Black Holes, White Dwarfs and Neutron Stars (Wiley, New York,

1983).

NOP W

© %

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS. We thank J. Goodman, B. Paczynski and B. Meyer for discussions. This work
was supported in part by NASA and the NSF at Chicago, by the NASA Fermilab Astrophysics Center
at Maryland and by BSF at Jerusalem. We thank the Jerusalem Winter School, the 1AS at Princeton
{D.N.S. and D-F.E.) and the Princeton University Observatory (T.P.) for hospitality.

Observation of interfacial atomic
steps during silicon oxidation
J. M. Gibson & M. Y. Lanzerotti*

AT&T Bell Laboratories, 600 Mountain Avenue, Murray Hill,
New Jersey 07974, USA

SILICON oxidation is perhaps the most common process in the
fabrication of electronic devices. The silicon/silicon dioxide inter-
face has excellent electrical properties which are employed in
field-effect devices and surface passivation, and are arguably
responsible for the dominance of silicon technology in the micro-
electronics industry. As device dimensions shrink, the need for
high-quality oxides grown at increasingly lower thicknesses and
temperatures has demanded ever more perfect, extremely flat
Si/SiO, interfaces. Here we use transmission electron microscopy
to image exposed and buried monatomic interfacial steps at the
Si/SiO, interface during oxidation. The results show that
extremely flat boundaries can be formed at low temperatures and
that atomic steps do not play a dominant role in the oxidation
process itself. A simple bulk-terminated Si/amorphous SiO, inter-
face is consistent with our data.

The nature of the terminating Si lattice at the Si/SiO, boun-
dary influences the transport of carriers in metal-oxide-semicon-
ductor field-effect transistors (MOSFETs), and correlation has
been observed between apparent interface roughness and Hall
mobility’. In the high-resolution transmission electron micro-
scopy (HRTEM) study of ref. 1 it was emphasized that only
statistical properties of interface roughness could be identified
because of the implicit projection through ~100 A specimen
thickness. One detailed study” of Si/SiO, interfacial roughness
with low-energy electron diffraction (LEED) assumed that the
Si/SiO, interfacial structure was unperturbed by stripping of
the oxide in HF. Other experiments*-’? which examined the
stoichiometry of the SiO, layer adjacent to the interface suggest
an abruptly terminating Si lattice. In a recent HRTEM study of
Si layers and their native oxides® deposited by molecular beam

* Present address: Dunster House, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA.

NATURE - VOL 340 - 13 JULY 1989

© 1989 Nature Publishing Group
