

===== PAGE 1 =====

Astron Astrophys Rev (2013) 21:70
DOI 10.1007/s00159-013-0070-7
REVIEW ARTICLE
The origin of galactic cosmic rays
Pasquale Blasi
Received: 1 September 2013 / Published online: 5 November 2013
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013
Abstract One century ago Viktor Hess carried out several balloon ﬂights that led
him to conclude that the penetrating radiation responsible for the discharge of elec-
troscopes was of extraterrestrial origin. One century from the discovery of this phe-
nomenon seems to be a good time to stop and think about what we have understood
about Cosmic Rays. The aim of this review is to illustrate the ideas that have been
and are being explored in order to account for the observable quantities related to
cosmic rays and to summarize the numerous new pieces of observation that are be-
coming available. In fact, despite the possible impression that development in this
ﬁeld is somewhat slow, the rate of new discoveries in the last decade or so has been
impressive, and mainly driven by beautiful pieces of observation. At the same time
scientists in this ﬁeld have been able to propose new, fascinating ways to investigate
particle acceleration inside the sources, making use of multifrequency observations
that range from the radio, to the optical, to X-rays and gamma rays. These ideas can
now be confronted with data.
I will mostly focus on supernova remnants as the most plausible sources of Galac-
tic cosmic rays, and I will review the main aspects of the modern theory of dif-
fusive particle acceleration at supernova remnant shocks, with special attention for
the dynamical reaction of accelerated particles on the shock and the phenomenon of
magnetic ﬁeld ampliﬁcation at the shock. Cosmic-ray escape from the sources is dis-
cussed as a necessary step to determine the spectrum of cosmic rays at the Earth. The
discussion of these theoretical ideas will always proceed parallel to an account of the
data being collected especially in X-ray and gamma-ray astronomy.
In the end of this review I will also discuss the phenomenon of cosmic-ray accel-
eration at shocks propagating in partially ionized media and the implications of this
P. Blasi (B)
INAF/Osservatorio Astroﬁsico di Arcetri, Largo E. Fermi, 5, 50125 Firenze, Italy
e-mail: blasi@arcetri.astro.it
P. Blasi
INFN/Gran Sasso Science Institute, Viale F. Crispi, 7, 67100 L’Aquila, Italy


===== PAGE 2 =====

Page 2 of 73
Astron Astrophys Rev (2013) 21:70
phenomenon in terms of width of the Balmer line emission. This ﬁeld of research has
recently experienced a remarkable growth, in that Hα lines have been found to bear
information on the cosmic-ray acceleration efﬁciency of supernova shocks.
Keywords Cosmic rays · Acceleration
1 Introduction
In 1962 Bruno Rossi ﬁnalized the writing of his book Cosmic Rays (Rossi 1964) in
coincidence with the 50th anniversary of the discovery of cosmic rays (CRs) (though
the book was published in 1964). In the epilogue of the book he emphasizes how
the ﬁeld of CR research had become a complex combination of several ﬁelds, from
Astronomy to Plasma Physics and Particle Physics. He also argues that “It is quite
possible that future historians of science will close the chapter on cosmic rays with
the ﬁftieth anniversary of Hess’s discovery”. Interestingly enough, very little of what
will be discussed in the present review was known or even proposed at the time of
Rossi’s book: scientists in this ﬁeld have been extremely active and many new ideas
and new observations have changed much of what was believed in the early 1960s.
The purpose of this review is to provide a recount of these exciting developments,
especially the ones that took place in the last decade or so. I am pretty sure that histo-
rians of science will not close the chapter on cosmic rays with the 100th anniversary
of their discovery. Too many loose ends need to be put in place.
Cosmic rays are mainly charged particles that contribute an energy density in the
Galaxy of about 1 eV cm−3. They are mainly protons (hydrogen nuclei) with about
10 % fraction of helium nuclei and smaller abundances of heavier elements. Despite
the much lower ﬂuxes of electrons and positrons, these particles provide us with pre-
cious information on the sources of CRs and the transport of these particles through
the Galactic magnetic ﬁeld. An even smaller ﬂux of electromagnetic radiation (from
radio frequencies to gamma rays) reaches the Earth from both the sources and from
the interactions that CRs occasionally suffer during propagation. The models we de-
velop for the origin of CRs are all based on an attempt to interpret these separate
pieces of observations within a uniﬁed frame.
The ﬂux of all nuclear components present in CRs (the so-called all-particle spec-
trum) is shown in Fig. 1. At low energies (below ∼30 GeV) the spectral shape
bends down, as a result of the modulation imposed by the presence of a magne-
tized wind originated from our Sun, which inhibits very low energy particles from
reaching the inner solar system. The prominent steepening of the spectrum at energy
EK = 3 × 1015 eV is named the knee: at this point the spectral slope of the differen-
tial ﬂux (ﬂux of particles reaching the Earth per unit time, surface and solid angle,
per unit energy interval) changes from ∼−2.7 to ∼−3.1. There is evidence that the
chemical composition of CRs changes across the knee region with a trend to become
increasingly more dominated by heavy nuclei at high energy (see Höorandel 2006,
for a review), at least up to ∼1017 eV. At even higher energies the chemical compo-
sition remains matter of debate. Recent measurements carried out with KASCADE-
GRANDE (Apel et al. 2013) reveal an interesting structure in the spectrum and com-
position of CRs between 1016 and 1018 eV: the collaboration managed to separate


===== PAGE 3 =====

P. Blasi: The origin of galactic cosmic rays
Page 3 of 73
Fig. 1 Spectrum of cosmic rays
at the Earth (courtesy Tom
Gaisser). The all-particle
spectrum measured by different
experiments is plotted, together
with the proton spectrum. The
subdominant contributions from
electrons, positrons and
antiprotons as measured by the
PAMELA experiment are shown
the showers in electron-poor (a proxy for light chemical composition) and electron-
rich (a proxy for heavy composition) showers and showed that the light component
(presumably protons and He, with some contamination from CNO) has an ankle-like
structure at 1017 eV. The authors suggest that this feature signals the transition from
Galactic to extragalactic CRs (in the light nuclei component). The spectrum of Fe-like
CRs continues up to energies of ∼1018 eV, where the ﬂux of Fe and the ﬂux of light
nuclei are comparable. A similar conclusion was recently reached by the ICETOP
Collaboration (Aartsen et al. 2013). This ﬁnding does not seem in obvious agree-
ment with the results of the Pierre Auger Observatory (Abraham et al. 2010), HiRes
(Sokolsky and Thomson 2007) and Telescope Array (Sokolsky 2013), which ﬁnd a
chemical composition at 1018 eV that is dominated by the light chemical component.
The presence of a knee and the change of chemical composition around it have
stimulated the idea that the bulk of CRs originates within our Galaxy. The knee could
for instance result from the superposition of cutoffs in the spectra of the different
chemicals as due to the fact that most acceleration processes are rigidity dependent:
if protons are accelerated in the sources to a maximum energy Ep,max ∼5 × 1015 eV,
then an iron nucleus will be accelerated to EFe,max = 26Ep,max ∼(1–2) × 1017 eV
(it is expected that at such high energies even iron nuclei are fully ionized, therefore
the unscreened charge is Z = 26). A knee would naturally arise as the superposition
of the cutoffs in the spectra of individual elements (see for instance Hörandel 2004;
Blasi and Amato 2012a; Gaisser et al. 2013).
The apparent regularity of the all-particle spectrum in the energy region below
the knee is at odds with the recent detection of features in the spectra of individual
elements, most notably protons and helium: the PAMELA satellite has provided ev-
idence that both the proton and helium spectra harden at 230 GeV (Adriani et al.


===== PAGE 4 =====

Page 4 of 73
Astron Astrophys Rev (2013) 21:70
2011). The spectrum of helium nuclei is also found systematically harder than the
proton spectrum, through only by a small amount. The slope of the proton spec-
trum below 230 GeV was measured to be γ1 = 2.89 ± 0.015, while the slope above
230 GeV becomes γ2 = 2.67±0.03. The slopes of protons and helium spectra at high
energies as measured by PAMELA appear to be in agreement with those measured
by the CREAM experiment (Ahn et al. 2010) at supra-TeV energies. Some evidence
also exists for a similar hardening in the spectra of heavier elements (see Maestro
et al. 2010 and references therein).
Different explanations for the feature at 230 GV have been put forward: Thoudam
and Hörandel (2012, 2013) suggested that a local source of CRs might appear in
the total spectrum as a spectral hardening. On the other hand, the fact that a simi-
lar feature has been detected in the spectrum of helium nuclei (and possibly heav-
ier nuclei) might suggest that a new physical phenomenon is showing up, probably
due to CR transport. For instance, Tomassetti (2012) showed that a spatially depen-
dent diffusion coefﬁcient may induce a spectral hardening under some assumptions
on the functional shape of the function representing the diffusion coefﬁcient (non-
separability between energy and space coordinates is required). Blasi et al. (2012a)
and Aloisio and Blasi (2013) showed that a similar feature may naturally appear if
CRs can produce their own scattering centers (diffusion) through streaming instabil-
ity. In the latter model, the feature appears at ∼200 GeV/n as a result of the transition
from self-generated diffusion and diffusion in a pre-existing turbulence.
Very recently, some preliminary data from the AMS-02 experiment on the Inter-
national Space Station have been presented1 and do not conﬁrm the existence of the
spectral breaks in the protons and helium spectra, as observed by PAMELA. Given
the preliminary nature of these data and the lack of refereed publications at the time
of writing of this review, I cannot comment further on their relevance.
The measurement of the ratio of ﬂuxes of some nuclei that can only be produced
by CR spallation and the ﬂux of their parent nuclei provides the best estimate so far
of the amount of matter that CRs traverse during their journey through the Galaxy.
In order to account for the observed B/C ratio, CRs must travel for times that exceed
the ballistic time by several orders of magnitude before escaping the Galaxy (this
number decreases with energy). This is the best argument to support the ansatz that
CRs travel diffusively in the Galactic magnetic ﬁeld (Juliusson et al. 1972). A similar
conclusion can be drawn from the observed ﬂux of some unstable isotopes such as
10Be (Simpson and Garcia-Munoz 1988). The decrease of the B/C ratio with energy
per nucleon is well described in terms of a diffusion coefﬁcient that increases with
energy.
In principle a similar argument can be applied to the so-called positron fraction, the
ratio of ﬂuxes of positrons and electrons plus positrons, Φe+/(Φe+ + Φe−), where,
however, special care is needed because of the important role of energy losses for
leptons. In ﬁrst approximation, it is expected that positrons may only be secondary
products of inelastic CR interactions that lead to the production and decays of charged
pions. In this case it can be proven that the positron fraction must decrease with en-
ergy. In fact several past observations, and most recently the PAMELA measurements
1Presentation by S. Ting at the 33rd International Cosmic Ray Conference, Rio De Janeiro, July 2013.


===== PAGE 5 =====

P. Blasi: The origin of galactic cosmic rays
Page 5 of 73
(Adriani et al. 2009) and the AMS-02 measurement (Aguilar et al. 2013), showed that
the positron fraction increases with energy above ∼10 GeV. This anomalous behavior
is not reﬂected in the ﬂux of antiprotons (Adriani et al. 2008): the ratio of the antipro-
tons to proton ﬂuxes Φ ¯p/Φp is seen to decrease, as expected based on the standard
model of diffusion. Although the rise of the positron fraction has also been linked
to dark matter annihilation in the Galaxy, there are astrophysical explanations of this
phenomenon that can account for the data without extreme assumptions (see the re-
view paper by Serpico 2012 for a careful description of both astrophysical models
and dark matter inspired models).
The simple interpretation of the knee as a superposition of the cutoffs in the spec-
tra of individual elements, as discussed above, would naively lead to the conclusion
that the spectrum of Galactic CRs should end at ∼26EK ≲1017 eV. Clearly this con-
clusion is not straightforward: a rare type of sources that can potentially accelerate
CRs to much larger energies may leave the interpretation of the knee unaffected and
yet change the energy at which Galactic CRs end. This opens the very important
question of where should one expect the transition to extragalactic CRs to take place.
Although in the present review I will only occasionally touch upon the problem of
ultra-high-energy cosmic rays (UHECRs), it is important to realize that the quest for
their origin is intimately connected with the nature of the transition from Galactic
CRs to UHECRs.
At the time of this review, there is rather convincing and yet circumstantial ev-
idence that the bulk of CRs are accelerated in supernova remnants (SNRs) in our
Galaxy, as ﬁrst proposed by Baade and Zwicky (1934), Ginzburg and Syrovatsky
(1961). The evidence is based on several independent facts: gamma rays unambigu-
ously associated with production of neutral pions have been detected from several
SNRs close to molecular clouds (Ackermann et al. 2013; Tavani et al. 2010); the
gamma-ray emission detected from the Tycho SNR (Giordano et al. 2012; Acciari
et al. 2011) also appears to be most likely of hadronic origin (Morlino and Caprioli
2011; Berezhko et al. 2013); the bright X-ray rims detected from virtually all young
SNRs (see Vink 2012, Ballet 2006 for a recent review) prove that the local magnetic
ﬁeld in the shock region has been substantially ampliﬁed, probably by accelerated
particles themselves, due to streaming instability (for recent reviews see Bykov et al.
2011a, 2013, Schure et al. 2012). Despite all this circumstantial evidence, no proof
has been found yet that SNRs can accelerate CRs up to the knee energy.
Charged particles can be energized at a supernova shock through diffusive shock
acceleration (DSA) (Krymskii 1977, Blandford and Ostriker 1978, Axford et al. 1977,
Bell 1978a, 1978b). If SNRs are the main contributors to Galactic CRs, an efﬁciency
of ∼10 % in particle acceleration is required (see Sect. 2). The dynamical reaction of
accelerated particles at a SNR shock is large enough to change the shock structure,
so as to call for a non-linear theory of DSA (Malkov and Drury 2001). Such a theory
should also be able to describe the generation of magnetic ﬁeld in the shock region as
due to CR-driven instabilities (Amato and Blasi 2006; Caprioli et al. 2008, 2009b),
although many problems still need to be solved.
The combination of DSA and diffusive propagation in the Galaxy represents what I
will refer to as the supernova remnant paradigm. Much work is being done at the time
of this review to ﬁnd solid proofs in favor or against this paradigm. I will summarize
this work here.


===== PAGE 6 =====

Page 6 of 73
Astron Astrophys Rev (2013) 21:70
The review is structured as follows: in Sect. 2 I will review the basic aspects of
the SNR paradigm for the origin of CRs; in Sect. 3 I will provide a pedagogical
discussion of the mechanism of diffusive shock acceleration (DSA) at collisionless
shocks and the maximum energy achievable. The non-linear version of the theory of
DSA is illustrated in Sect. 4, where the dynamical reaction of accelerated particles
and magnetic ﬁeld ampliﬁcation are discussed in depth. In Sect. 5 I brieﬂy discuss the
issue of SN explosions in superbubbles. A discussion of several crucial pieces of the
SNR paradigm (CR escape, spectra of SNRs and SNRs close to molecular clouds)
are discussed in Sect. 6. The phenomenon of DSA in partially ionized material is
discussed in Sect. 7, with special emphasis of the implication of CR acceleration for
the width of the Hα line in Balmer-dominated shocks. I conclude in Sect. 8.
2 The bases of the SNR paradigm
The abundances of some light elements such as boron, lithium and beryllium in the
CRs provide us with the best estimates of the time τesc(E) spent by CRs in the Galaxy
before escaping. More precisely, the ratio of boron and carbon ﬂuxes is related to the
grammage traversed by CRs, X(E) = ¯nμvτesc(E), where ¯n is the mean gas density in
the conﬁnement volume of the Galaxy (disc plus halo), μ is the mean mass of the gas,
v is the speed of particles. For particles with energy per nucleon of 10 GeV/n the mea-
sured B/C corresponds to X ∼10 g cm−2. If the sources are located in the thin disc
of the Galaxy with half thickness h = 150 pc and the halo extends to a height H, the
mean density can be estimated as ¯n = ndisch/H = 5 × 10−2 ndisc
1 cm−3

H
3 kpc
−1 cm−3.
For a standard chemical composition of the ISM (nHe ≈0.15nH ) the mean mass
is μ = (nH + 4nHe)/(nH + nHe) ≈1.4mp. It follows that for a proton with energy
E∗= 10 GeV the typical escape time is
τ∗∼X(E∗)
¯nμc
= 90
 H
3 kpc

Myr,
(1)
which exceeds the ballistic propagation time scale by at least three orders of mag-
nitude. This remains the strongest evidence so far for diffusive motion of CRs in
the Galaxy. A diffusion coefﬁcient can be introduced as τesc(E) = H 2/D(E) =
τ∗(E/E∗)−δ, so that at 10 GeV D(E) ≃3 × 1028
H
3 kpc

cm2 s−1. The grammage
(and therefore the escape time) decreases with energy (or rather with rigidity) as in-
ferred from the B/C ratio, illustrated in Fig. 2, which shows a collection of data points
on the ratio of ﬂuxes of boron and carbon, as obtained by using the data collection
provided by the Cosmic Ray Database (Maurin et al. 2013). Figure 2 illustrates the
level of uncertainty in the determination of the slope of the B/C ratio at high ener-
gies, which reﬂects on the uncertainty in the high-energy behavior of the diffusion
coefﬁcient. At low energies the uncertainty is even more severe due to the effects
of solar modulation which suppresses CR ﬂuxes in a different way during different
phases of the solar activity (see Potgieter 2013 for a recent review). The high rigidity
behavior of the B/C ratio is compatible with a power law grammage X(R) ∝R−δ
with δ = 0.3–0.6.


===== PAGE 7 =====

P. Blasi: The origin of galactic cosmic rays
Page 7 of 73
Fig. 2 B/C ratio as a function of energy per nucleon. Data have been extracted from the Cosmic Ray
Database (Maurin et al. 2013)
Supernovae exploding in our Galaxy at a rate RSN liberate a kinetic energy in the
form of moving ejecta of ESN = 1051E51 erg. This number is weakly dependent upon
whether the SN is of type Ia or a core-collapse SN, although it might be somewhat dif-
ferent for rare types of SNe (type Ib, Ic), possibly connected with gamma-ray bursts.
As I discuss below, particle acceleration in SNRs is believed to occur through dif-
fusive shock acceleration, which leads to power law spectra of accelerated particles,
and for the sake of the present discussion I assume that such an injection spectrum is
in the form
N(p) = ξCR
ESN
m2 I(γ )
 p
m
−γ
,
I(γ ) ≈2(3 −γ )(γ −2)
4 −γ
,
where γ > 2 is the slope of the differential spectrum of accelerated particles and
ξCR < 1 is the CR acceleration efﬁciency. Here I(γ ) is a normalization factor ob-
tained by imposing that the total energy at the source equals ξCRESN. It is best to
normalize the ﬂux of CRs to the observed proton ﬂux, since it is not expected to
be affected by spallation reactions. The ﬂux of protons observed by different exper-
iments is shown in Fig. 3 (data are from the Cosmic Ray Database Maurin et al.
2013). Provided we focus on sufﬁciently high energies, ionization losses can also
be neglected and the effects of solar modulation play no role (we can also assume
E ≃pc). In this case the spectrum of CR protons contributed by SNRs at the Earth
can be simply written as
J(E) = c
4π
N(E)RSN
πR2
d2H τesc(E)
= 8 × 105ξCRI(γ )
 RSN
30 yr−1
E
m
−γ −δE∗
m
δ
m−2 s−1 sr−1 GeV−1,
(2)
and I assumed that the disc of the Galaxy has a radius Rd = 10 kpc. It is useful to
notice that if the escape time is normalized to the B/C ratio at a given energy E∗(see
Eq. (1)) then the expected ﬂux becomes independent of the size of the halo H. This


===== PAGE 8 =====

Page 8 of 73
Astron Astrophys Rev (2013) 21:70
Fig. 3 Proton spectrum as measured by different experiments. Data are from the Cosmic Ray Database
(Maurin et al. 2013)
reﬂects the fact that in the simple diffusion model introduced here the CR ﬂux in the
absence of losses and the grammage both scale with the ratio H/D(E). This rule
of thumb remains valid even in more sophisticated propagation calculations, such as
GALPROP.
Normalizing to the proton ﬂux at E∗= 10 GeV,
E2
∗J(E∗) ≈2 × 103 GeVm−2 s−1 sr−1
(see Fig. 3), one immediately gets
ξCR ≈2.5 × 10−3
I(γ )
(E∗/m)(γ −2)
 RSN
30 yr−1
−1
.
(3)
The required efﬁciency turns out to be a weak function of the slope of the injection
spectrum γ and is typically ξCR ≃2–3 % when changing the value of δ. The total
CR acceleration efﬁciency is somewhat higher than the estimate in Eq. (3) because of
the contribution of nuclei heavier than hydrogen. More reﬁned calculations provide a
better estimate of the total acceleration efﬁciency that is between 5 % and 10 % for
the bulk of SNRs, while it can be higher or smaller for individual objects, depending
upon the environment in which the supernova event takes place.
3 The theory of diffusive shock acceleration of test particles
A supernova explosion in the interstellar medium (ISM) results in the injection of
metal enriched ejecta with a total mass Mej moving with a velocity Vej. If the total
energy output in the form of kinetic energy is ESN = 1051E51 erg, then the velocity
of the ejecta in the initial phases can be written as
Vej = 10000E1/2
51 M−1/2
ej,⊙km/s,
(4)
where Mej,⊙is the mass of the ejecta in units of solar masses.


===== PAGE 9 =====

P. Blasi: The origin of galactic cosmic rays
Page 9 of 73
The sound speed in the ISM can be estimated as
cs =

γg
kT
mp
≈11

T
104K
1/2
km/s,
(5)
where γg is the adiabatic index (assumed here to be γg = 5/3) and T is the tempera-
ture. It follows that the typical Mach number of the plasma ejected in a SN explosion
is
Ms = Vej
cs
≈900E1/2
51 M−1/2
ej,⊙

T
104K
−1/2
.
(6)
The motion of the ejecta is highly supersonic and drives the formation of a shock
front. The motion of the shock front is heavily affected by the environment around
the parent star and by the density proﬁle in the ejecta (see McKee and Truelove 1995
for a review). The matter accumulated behind the shock during the expansion in-
creases the inertia of the expanding shell and eventually slows down the explosion at
a time when the accumulated mass equals that of the ejecta. For an explosion in the
standard ISM one can write
4
3πρISMR3
ST = Mej →RST =
 3Mej
4πρISM
1/3
≈2M1/3
ej,⊙
 nISM
1 cm−3
−1/3
pc,
(7)
where RST deﬁnes the radius of the expanding shell at the beginning of the so-called
Sedov–Taylor (adiabatic) phase. This stage of the SNR evolution starts at the time
TST = RST
Vej
≈200M5/6
ej,⊙E−1/2
51
 nISM
1 cm−3
−1/3
years.
(8)
These estimates of the Sedov–Taylor radius and time should be considered as orders
of magnitude, while the actual values depend on the conditions around the supernova
explosion. For instance, for a core-collapse SN explosion the material ejected by the
pre-supernova star may dominate the density in the initial phases of the explosion,
and the adiabatic phase may start at earlier times than indicated by Eq. (8). On the
other hand, in the case of a fast wind, with low density (such as would be the case for
Wolf–Rayet pre-supernova star) the SN explosion might take place in an underdense
bubble of hot dilute gas. In this case the adiabatic phase might start at later time.
In any case, for core-collapse SN explosions the dynamics of the expanding shell is
usually much more complex to describe than in the case of type Ia SN explosions
in the ISM. This also reﬂects in the morphology of the non-thermal emission from
SNRs of different types. The morphology of SNRs of core-collapse SN explosions is
usually irregular and often asymmetric. This is also due to the fact that the environ-
ment in which massive stars explode through a core collapse is often complex, with
inhomogeneous distribution of gas and the presence of molecular clouds that provide
the gas material for the formation of these massive, relatively short lived stars. On
the other hand, type Ia SNRs are usually more regular and it is not rare to ﬁnd cases
of almost perfectly spherical SN shells as observed at all wavelengths.
In Fig. 4 I show the cases of RX J1713.7-3946 (left panel, from Aharonian et al.
2007) and Tycho (right panel, from Warren et al. 2005). The former is a SNR orig-
inated from a core-collapse SN explosion and its gamma-ray emission (color) and


===== PAGE 10 =====

Page 10 of 73
Astron Astrophys Rev (2013) 21:70
Fig. 4 Left Panel: Morphology of the RX J1713.7-3946. The colors illustrate the high-energy gamma-ray
emission as measured by HESS (Aharonian et al. 2007), while the contours show the X-ray emission in the
1–3 keV band measured by ASCA (Uchiyama et al. 2002). Right Panel: Morphology of the Tycho SNR
as measured with Chandra (Warren et al. 2005). The three colors refer to emission in the photon energy
range 0.95–1.26 keV (red), 1.63–2.26 keV (green), and 4.1–6.1 keV (blue). The latter emission is very
concentrated in a thin rim and is the result of synchrotron emission of very high-energy electrons
X-ray emission (lines) show the irregular morphology of this remnant. The Tycho
SNR is the leftover of a type Ia SN exploded in 1572 at ∼3 kpc distance from the
solar system. The image shows its thermal X-ray emission, mainly contributed by the
ejecta in the central part of the explosion region, and the non-thermal X-ray emission
which has the rim-like morphology shown in the picture. In Sect. 6 I will discuss at
length the implications of the non-thermal X-ray morphology of SNRs and of Ty-
cho in particular. All these aspects are very important whenever the predictions of a
theory of acceleration of CRs have to face observations.
As anticipated above, the supersonic motion of the ejecta of a stellar explosion
leads to the formation of a shock front propagating in the ISM or in the circumstellar
medium, depending on the type of SN explosion. The Mach number of the shock de-
pends on the conditions in the region in which the explosion takes place. For instance
the Mach number of the shock becomes appreciably lower than the one quoted in
Eq. (6) if the shock propagates in the hot tenuous gas around a core-collapse SNR.
The ﬁrst question that we have to face is, however, about the nature of these shock
waves. In the section below I will argue that SN shocks (and in fact most astrophysi-
cal shock waves) are intrinsically different from the shock waves that we are used to
in the Earth atmosphere, in that the latter are mediated by molecular collisions, while
the former could not be formed based on particle-particle collisions in the ISM. The
SN shocks expanding in the ordinary ISM belong to the class of collisionless shocks.
Since many fundamental concepts of the physics of particle acceleration in astro-
physical shocks rely on this property, I dedicate some space here to a discussion of
the basic principles that regulate the formation of a collisionless shock.
3.1 Collisionless shocks
Collisionless shocks are formed because of the excitation of electromagnetic instabil-
ities, namely collective effects generated by groups of charged particles in the back-
ground plasma. A thorough review of the theory of collisionless shock waves has


===== PAGE 11 =====

P. Blasi: The origin of galactic cosmic rays
Page 11 of 73
recently been published by Treumann (2009), and I refer to that paper for a careful
discussion of the many subtle aspects of the physics of collisionless shocks. Here I
limit myself with a qualitative description of the conditions necessary for their forma-
tion, to be used as background material for some of the topics discussed in connec-
tion with the physics of particle acceleration. Moreover, since the shocks that will be
discussed in this review are non-relativistic, here I will restrict the discussion to non-
relativistic shocks v ≪c and cases where the temperature downstream of the shock is
much smaller than the electron mass, so as to avoid pair production. The requirement
of a shock being non-relativistic can also be rewritten in terms of the Alfvenic Mach
number:
v ≪c →MA = v
vA
≪
mp
me
1/2 ωp,e
ωc,e
= 1.3 × 105n1/2
cm−3B−1
μG,
(9)
where vA = B0/4πnmp is the Alfvén velocity, ωp,e and ωc,e are the electron
plasma frequency and cyclotron frequency.
In an electron–proton plasma, Coulomb scattering acts in three different ways:
(1) it leads the electrons to thermalize, namely to reach a Maxwellian distribution;
(2) it leads protons to thermalize; (3) it leads to thermalization of electrons and pro-
tons. Typically these three processes have a well deﬁned hierarchy: electron thermal-
ization is the fastest process, followed by electron–proton thermalization. The slowest
process is the thermalization of protons. This clearly opens several questions: ﬁrst,
electron–proton collisions are likely to occur when the proton distribution is not yet
maxwellian; second, the time scale for electron–proton equilibration may be exceed-
ingly long as compared with the age of the system at hand.
The time scale for equilibration between two generic populations of particles with
temperature T1 and T2, masses m1 and m2 and the same electric charge q and same
density n is (Spitzer 1962):
τeq =
3m1m2k3/2
B
8(2π)1/2nq4 lnΛ
 T1
m1
+ T2
m2
3/2
,
(10)
where kB is the Boltzmann constant and lnΛ ∼10 is the Coulomb logarithm. For
instance, the equilibration time of electrons with themselves would be:
τeq,ee ≈1200

n
1 cm−3
−1 Te
108K
3/2
years,
(11)
while for protons:
τeq,pp =≈2.3 × 106

n
1 cm−3
−1 Tp
108K
3/2
years.
(12)
Having in mind the case of a SNR, it is easy to envision that these equilibration times
are long compared with the scale on which the shocks associated with the blast waves
are actually observed, thereby raising the question of how such shocks are actually
formed. On the other hand, the comparison with some plasma related quantities may
be illuminating: for instance, for a velocity of 1000 km/s and density 1 cm−3, the


===== PAGE 12 =====

Page 12 of 73
Astron Astrophys Rev (2013) 21:70
cyclotron radius of a particle is mvc/eB0 which is ∼1010 cm for a proton in a μG
magnetic ﬁeld and about 2000 times smaller for an electron. The electron plasma
frequency is ωp,e = (4πe2n/me)1/2 ∼5.6 × 104n1/2
cm−3, corresponding to a spatial
scale v/ωp,e ∼2 × 103 cm for a velocity v ∼108 cm/s.
The formation of shock waves in these conditions is likely due to collective effects
of charged particles. Several aspects of the physics of these collisionless shocks are all
but trivial. Since the thermalization of these plasmas is directly linked to isotropiza-
tion of the directions of motion of particles, it is natural to expect that the tempera-
tures of electrons and protons immediately behind the shock front are proportional to
the masses and therefore different for electrons and protons:
kTe ≈3
2mev2 = me
mp
kTp.
(13)
Coulomb collisions between electrons and protons eventually lead them to reach the
same temperature, but the time necessary to achieve this situation often exceeds the
age of the source, hence the equilibration is all but guaranteed in collisionless shocks.
This is especially true for young SNRs, since for typical gas densities n ∼0.1–1 cm−3
typical of the average ISM, the thermalization time may be of several thousands years.
For instance, for a strong shock one has Tp = 3
16
mpV 2
sh
kB
= 5.6×108(Vsh/5000 km/s)2
and using Eq. (13) for Te, one ﬁnds that electrons would need several 100 years to
reach the same temperature as protons (even assuming that protons are thermalized
in the ﬁrst place).
On the other hand, even partial equilibration between electrons and protons may
produce observational signatures, such as the excitation of lines in the regime of non-
equilibrium ionization of heavy atoms such as oxygen, which takes place whenever
the electron temperature is above ∼1 keV (Ellison et al. 2007). For a shock moving
with velocity v the temperatures of protons and electrons immediately downstream
can be estimated to be of order kTp ∼15v2
8 keV and Te ∼80v2
8 eV, where v8 is the
shock velocity in units of 108 cm/s = 1000 km/s.
The formation of collisionless shocks raises the important question about the
mechanism for dissipation, needed in order to transform part of the kinetic energy
of the plasma crossing the shock from upstream into thermal energy of the plasma
downstream. The dissipation is expected to be qualitatively different depending upon
the orientation of the background magnetic ﬁeld. For parallel shocks (background
ﬁeld oriented along the normal to the shock surface) the excitation of Weibel insta-
bility leads to the generation of small-scale magnetic ﬁelds which become part of the
dissipation mechanism (see discussion by Treumann 2009).
It is easy to picture how the physics of dissipation at a collisionless shock also
affects the injection of particles into the acceleration cycle. Similar to the case of col-
lisional shocks, where the thickness of the shock front is of the order of the collisional
mean free path, for collisionless shocks the thickness of the front is of the order of
the typical scale of the instabilities that are responsible for dissipation. As an order
of magnitude one can expect that the thickness of the front is several gyration radii
of the thermal particles in the plasma. While gyrating in the self-produced magnetic
ﬁelds, a small fraction of particles on the tail of the distribution may end up in the up-
stream side of the shock that is being formed, thereby bootstrapping the injection of


===== PAGE 13 =====

P. Blasi: The origin of galactic cosmic rays
Page 13 of 73
the ﬁrst accelerated particles. Injection remains one of the most poorly known aspects
of particle acceleration at astrophysical shocks. In the last few years, Particle-in-Cell
(PIC) simulations have been instrumental in reaching a better understanding of the
formation of collisionless shocks (both relativistic and non-relativistic) and the initial
stages of the acceleration process (Spitkovsky 2008a, 2008b; Sironi and Spitkovsky
2011, Gargaté and Spitkovsky 2012).
Independent of the speciﬁc mechanism for dissipation, after the collisionless shock
has been formed one can write equations for conservation of mass, momentum and
energy across the shock surface. Here I limit myself with the simple case of a plain
parallel inﬁnite shock and with accelerated particles treated as test particles, having
no dynamical role. For simplicity I also assume that on the scales we are interested
in the shock can be considered stationary in time. In a realistic situation, basically
all of these conditions get broken to some extent, and it becomes important to always
have under control the limitations of the calculations we carry out, depending on their
application.
Conservation of mass, momentum and energy across the shock read
∂
∂x (ρu) = 0,
(14)
∂
∂x

ρu2 + Pg

= 0,
(15)
∂
∂x
1
2ρu3 +
γg
γg −1uPg

= 0,
(16)
where γg is the adiabatic index, Pg is the gas pressure and ρ and u are the density and
velocity of the plasma as seen in the reference frame of the shock. These conservation
equations have the trivial solution ρ = constant, u = constant, Pg = constant, but
they also admit the discontinuous solutions:
ρ2
ρ1
= u1
u2
=
(γg + 1)M2
1
(γg −1)M2
1 + 2,
(17)
Pg,2
Pg,1
= 2γgM2
1
γg + 1 −γg −1
γg + 1,
(18)
T2
T1
= (2γgM2
1 −γg(γg −1))((γg −1)M2
1 + 2)
(γg + 1)2M2
1
.
(19)
For a plasma with adiabatic index γg = 5/3 and M1 ≫1 the jump conditions simplify
considerably. I refer to this case as the strong shock limit and it is easy to show that
in this asymptotic limit
ρ2
ρ1
= u1
u2
= 4,
Pg,2
Pg,1
= 5
4M2
1,
T2
T1
= 5
16M2
1.
(20)


===== PAGE 14 =====

Page 14 of 73
Astron Astrophys Rev (2013) 21:70
Recalling that M2
1 = u2
1/c2
s,1 and c2
s,1 = γ Pg,1/ρ1 one easily obtains that
kT2 = 3
16mpu2
1,
(21)
namely for a strong shock a large fraction of the kinetic energy of the particles up-
stream is transformed into internal energy of the gas behind the shock. The down-
stream temperature becomes basically independent of the temperature upstream, T1.
The presence of non-thermal particles accelerated at the shock front, and of mag-
netic ﬁelds in the shock region both change the conservation equations written above,
as described in Sect. 4. It is important to realize that the processes involved in the for-
mation of a collisionless shock also determine the injection of a few particles in the
acceleration cycle that may lead to CRs. At the same time CRs change the struc-
ture of the collisionless shock, thereby affecting their own injection. This complex
chain of effects illustrates in a qualitative way what is known as non-linear particle
acceleration.
3.2 Transport of charged particles in magnetic ﬁelds: basic concepts
The original idea that the bulk motion of magnetized clouds could be transformed
into the kinetic energy of individual charged particles was ﬁrst introduced by Enrico
Fermi (Fermi 1949, 1954) and is currently widely referred to as second order Fermi
acceleration. Each interaction of a test particle with a magnetized cloud results in ei-
ther an energy gain or an energy loss, depending upon the relative direction of motion
at the time of the scattering. On average however, the head-on collisions dominate
upon tail-on collisions and the momentum vector of the charged particle performs
a random walk in momentum space, in which the length of the vector increases on
average by an amount ∼E/E = (4/3)(V/c)2, where V/c is the modulus of the ve-
locity of the clouds in units of the speed of light. The scaling with the second power
of V/c is the reason why the mechanism is named second order Fermi mechanism.
In the ISM the role of the magnetized clouds is played by plasma waves, most no-
tably Alfvén waves, which move at speed vA = B/√4πρi = 2Bμni,cm−3 km/s, where
ρi = nimp is the mass density of ionized material. Given the smallness of the wave
velocity it is easy to understand that the role of second order Fermi acceleration is,
in general, rather limited. However, the revolutionary concept that it bears is still of
the utmost importance: the electric ﬁeld induced by the motion of the magnetized
cloud (or wave) may accelerate charged particles. Given the importance of this phe-
nomenon, not only for particle acceleration but for propagation as well, in this section
I will illustrate some basic concepts that turn out to be useful in order to understand
the behavior of a charged particle in a background of waves.
The motion of a particle moving in an ordered magnetic ﬁeld B0 = B0ˆz conserves
the component of the momentum in the ˆz direction and since the magnetic ﬁeld cannot
do work on a charged particle, the modulus of the momentum is also conserved. This
implies that the particle trajectory consists of a rotation in the xy plane perpendicular
to ˆz, with a frequency Ω = qB0/(mcγ ) (gyration frequency) and a regular motion in
the ˆz-direction with momentum pz = pμ where μ is the cosine of the pitch angle of


===== PAGE 15 =====

P. Blasi: The origin of galactic cosmic rays
Page 15 of 73
Fig. 5 Trajectory of a charged
particle moving with a pitch
angle θ with respect to an
ordered magnetic ﬁeld B0, along
the ˆz axis
the particle (see Fig. 5). The velocity of the particle in the three spatial dimensions
can therefore be written as:
vx(t) = v⊥cos(Ωt + φ),
(22)
vy(t) = −v⊥sin(Ωt + φ),
(23)
vz(t) = v∥= vμ = constant,
(24)
where φ is an arbitrary phase and v∥and v⊥are the parallel and perpendicular com-
ponents of the particle velocity.
Let us assume now that on top of the background magnetic ﬁeld B0 there is an
oscillating magnetic ﬁeld consisting of the superposition of Alfvén waves polarized
linearly along the x-axis. In the reference frame of the waves (vA ≪c) the electric
ﬁeld vanishes and one can write the individual Fourier modes as
δB = δB ˆx sin(kz −ωt) ≈δB ˆx sin(kz),
(25)
where the z coordinate of the particle is z = vμt. The Lorentz force on the particle in
the z-direction is
mvγ dμ
dt = −q
c δBvy →dμ
dt = Ω δB
B0

1 −μ21/2 sin(Ωt + φ)sin(kvμt),
(26)
which can also be rewritten as
dμ
dt = 1
2Ω δB
B0

1 −μ21/2
cos
	
(Ω −kvμ)t + φ

−cos
	
(Ω + kvμ)t + φ


. (27)
From this expression it is clear that for μ > 0 (particles moving in the positive di-
rection) Ω + kvμ > 0 and the cosine averages to zero on a long time scale. The ﬁrst
cosine also averages to zero unless Ω = kvμ, in which case the sign of δμ depends
on cos(φ) and it is random if the phase is random. The average over the phase also
vanishes, but the mean square variation of the pitch angle does not vanish:
μμ
t

φ
= πΩ2
δB
B0
2 (1 −μ2)
μ
δ

k −Ω
vμ

.
(28)
The linear scaling of the square of the pitch angle cosine with time is indicative of
the diffusive motion of the particles. The rate of scattering in pitch angle is usually


===== PAGE 16 =====

Page 16 of 73
Astron Astrophys Rev (2013) 21:70
written in terms of pitch angle diffusion coefﬁcient:
ν =
θθ
t

φ
= πΩ2
δB
B0
2 1
μδ

k −Ω
vμ

.
(29)
If P(k)dk is the wave energy density in the wave number range dk at the resonant
wave number k = Ω/vμ, the total scattering rate can be written as:
ν = π
4
 kP(k)
B2
0/8π

Ω.
(30)
The time required for the particle direction to change by δθ ∼1 is
τ ∼1/ν ∼Ω−1
 kP(k)
B2
0/8π
−1
(31)
so that the spatial diffusion coefﬁcient can be estimated as
D(p) = 1
3v(vτ) ≃1
3v2Ω−1
 kP(k)
B2
0/8π
−1
= 1
3
rLv
F ,
(32)
where rL = v/Ω is the Larmor radius of the particles and F =
 kP(k)
B2
0/8π

.
It is interesting to notice that the escape time of CRs as measured from the B/C
ratio and/or from unstable elements, namely a time of order 107 years in the energy
range ∼1 GeV, corresponds to require H 2/D(p) ∼107 years, where H ∼3 kpc is
the estimated size of the galactic halo. This implies D ≈1029 cm2 s−1, which corre-
sponds to require δB/B ∼6×10−4 at the resonant wave number. A very small power
in the form of Alfvén waves can easily account for the level of diffusion necessary
to conﬁne CRs in the Galaxy. The requirements become even less demanding when
higher energy CRs are considered.
The simple treatment presented here should also clarify the main physical aspects
of particle scattering in the ISM, not only in terms of CR conﬁnement in the Galaxy,
but also in terms of particle transport inside the accelerators. Alfvén waves in prox-
imity of a shock front can lead to a diffusive motion of particles on both sides of
the shock surface. This apparently simple conclusion is the physical basis of diffu-
sive shock acceleration, which will be discussed in the sections below. However, it is
also important to realize the numerous limitations involved in the simple description
illustrated above.
First, the perturbative nature of the formalism introduced here limits its applica-
bility to situations in which δB/B ≪1. Second, as discussed already by Jokipii and
Parker (1969a) and (1969b), when δB/B becomes closer to unity, the random walk
of magnetic ﬁeld lines may become the most important reason for particle transport
perpendicular to the background magnetic ﬁeld. The combined transport of particles
as due to diffusion parallel to the magnetic ﬁeld and perpendicular to it is not yet
fully understood, and in fact it is not completely clear that the overall motion can be
described as purely diffusive. In other words, the mean square displacement ⟨z2⟩may


===== PAGE 17 =====

P. Blasi: The origin of galactic cosmic rays
Page 17 of 73
not scale linearly with time (see for instance Giacalone 2013 and references therein).
The particle transport perpendicular to the background ﬁeld most likely plays a very
important role in terms of conﬁnement of CRs in the Galaxy, especially when realis-
tic models of the galactic magnetic ﬁeld are taken into account (DeMarco et al. 2007;
Effenberger et al. 2012).
Third, as discussed by Goldreich and Sridhar (1995), the cascade of Alfvenic tur-
bulence from large to small spatial scales proceeds in an anisotropic way, so that at
the resonant wavenumbers relevant for particle scattering, small power might be left
in the parallel wavenumbers. The CR transport in these conditions might be better
modeled as diffusion in a slab plus two dimensional turbulence and the diffusion
of particles in such turbulence can be described by the so-called non-linear guiding
center theory, ﬁrst developed by Matthaeus et al. (2003). The main physical charac-
teristic of this theory of CR transport is that the diffusion coefﬁcient perpendicular to
the magnetic ﬁeld is a non-trivial function of the diffusion coefﬁcient parallel to the
ﬁeld. This non-linearity makes it difﬁcult to achieve a fully self-consistent treatment
of CR propagation either in the Galaxy or in the accelerators. This point has recently
been investigated in detail by Shalchi et al. (2010).
3.3 DSA through the transport equation
Let us consider a shock front characterized by a Mach number Ms. The compression
factor at the shock r = u1/u2 is then
r =
4M2
s
M2s + 3,
(33)
which tends to 4 in the limit of strong shocks, Ms →∞. A test particle diffusing in
the upstream plasma does not gain or lose energy (although the second order Fermi
process discussed above may be at work).
For a stationary parallel shock, namely a shock for which the normal to the shock
is parallel to the orientation of the background magnetic ﬁeld (see Fig. 6) the transport
Fig. 6 Illustration of
test-particle acceleration at a
collisionless shock. In the shock
frame the plasma enters from the
left with velocity u1 and exits to
the right with velocity u2 < u1.
Here the test particle is shown to
enter downstream with cosine of
the pitch angle μ (as measured
in the upstream plasma frame)
and exit with a cosine of the
pitch angle μ′ (as measured in
the downstream plasma frame)


===== PAGE 18 =====

Page 18 of 73
Astron Astrophys Rev (2013) 21:70
of particles is described by the diffusion–convection equation (Skilling 1975a) (see
Blandford and Eichler 1987 for a detailed derivation), which in the shock frame reads
u∂f
∂z = ∂
∂z

D ∂f
∂z

+ 1
3
du
dz p ∂f
∂p + Q,
(34)
where f (z,p) is the distribution function of accelerated particles, normalized in a
way that the number of particles with momentum p at location z is

dp4πp2f (p,z).
In Eq. (34) the LHS is the convection term, the ﬁrst term of the RHS is the spatial
diffusion term. The second term on the RHS describes the effect of ﬂuid compression
on the accelerated particles, while Q(x,p) is the injection term.
A few comments on Eq. (34) are in order: (1) the shock will appear in this equa-
tion only in terms of a boundary condition at z = 0, and the shock is assumed to
have inﬁnitely small size along z. This implies that this equation cannot properly
describe the thermal particles in the ﬂuid. The distribution function of accelerated
particles is continuous across the shock. (2) In a self-consistent treatment in which
the acceleration process is an integral part of the processes that lead to the forma-
tion of the shock one would not need to specify an injection term. Injection would
result from the microphysics of the particle motions at the shock. This ambiguity is
usually faced in a phenomenological way, by adopting recipes such as the thermal
leakage one (Malkov 1998; Gieseler et al. 2000) that allow one to relate the injection
to some property of the plasma behind the shock. This aspect becomes relevant only
in the case of non-linear theories of DSA, while for the test particle theory the injec-
tion term only determines the arbitrary normalization of the spectrum. However, it is
worth recalling that while these recipes may apply to the case of protons as injected
particles, the injection of heavier nuclei may be much more complex. In fact, it has
been argued that nuclei are injected at the shock following the process of sputtering
of dust grains (Meyer et al. 1997; Ellison et al. 1997).
For the purpose of the present discussion I will assume that injection only takes
place at the shock surface, immediately downstream of the shock, and that it only
consists of particles with given momentum pinj:
Q(p,x) = ηn1u1
4πp2
inj
δ(p −pinj)δ(z) = q0δ(z),
(35)
where n1 and u1 are the ﬂuid density and ﬂuid velocity upstream of the shock and η
is the acceleration efﬁciency, deﬁned here as the fraction of the incoming number ﬂux
across the shock surface that takes part in the acceleration process. Hereafter I will
use the indices 1 and 2 to refer to quantities upstream and downstream respectively.
The compression term vanishes everywhere but at the shock since du/dz =
(u2 −u1)δ(z). Integration of Eq. (34) around the shock surface (between z = 0−
and z = 0+) leads to:

D ∂f
∂z

2
−

D ∂f
∂z

1
+ 1
3(u2 −u1)p df0
dp + q0(p) = 0,
(36)
where f0(p) is now the distribution function of accelerated particles at the shock sur-
face. Particle scattering downstream leads to a homogeneous distribution of particles,


===== PAGE 19 =====

P. Blasi: The origin of galactic cosmic rays
Page 19 of 73
at least for the case of a parallel shock, so that [∂f/∂z]2 = 0. In the upstream region,
where du/dz = 0 the transport equation reduces to:
∂
∂z

uf −D ∂f
∂z

= 0,
(37)
and since the quantity in parentheses vanishes at upstream inﬁnity, it follows that

D ∂f
∂z

1
= u1f0.
(38)
Using this result in Eq. (36) we obtain an equation for f0(p)
u1f0 = 1
3(u2 −u1)p df0
dp + ηn1u1
4πp2
inj
δ(p −pinj),
(39)
which is easily solved to give
f0(p) =
3r
r −1
ηn1
4πp2
inj
 p
pinj
−3r
r−1
.
(40)
The spectrum of accelerated particles is a power law in momentum (and not in en-
ergy as is often assumed in the literature) with a slope α that only depends on the
compression ratio r:
α =
3r
r −1.
(41)
The slope tends asymptotically to α = 4 in the limit Ms →∞of an inﬁnitely strong
shock front. The number of particles with energy ϵ is n(ϵ)dϵ = 4πp2f0(p)(dp/dϵ)dϵ,
therefore n(ϵ) ∝ϵ−α for relativistic particles and n(ϵ) ∝ϵ(1−α)/2 for non-relativistic
particles. In the limit of strong shocks, n(ϵ) ∝ϵ−2 (n(ϵ) ∝ϵ−3/2) in the relativistic
(non-relativistic) regime.
Some points are worth being mentioned: the shape of the spectrum of the accel-
erated particles does not depend upon the diffusion coefﬁcient. On one hand this is
good news, in that the knowledge of the diffusion properties of the particles repre-
sent the greatest challenge for any theory of particle acceleration. On the other hand,
this implies that the concept of maximum energy of accelerated particles is not natu-
rally embedded in the test particle theory of DSA. In fact, the power law distribution
derived above does extend (in principle) up to inﬁnite particle energy. In the strong
shock limit, such spectrum contains a divergent energy, thereby implying a failure of
the test particle assumption. Clearly the absence of a maximum energy mainly derives
from the assumption of stationarity of the acceleration process, which can be achieved
only in the presence of effective escape of particles from the accelerator, a point which
is directly connected to the issue of maximum energy, as discussed in Sect. 3.4.
3.4 Maximum energy: time versus space
There is some level of ambiguity in the deﬁnition of the maximum energy achieved
in a SNR shock expanding in the ISM. The ambiguity arises from the fact that the


===== PAGE 20 =====

Page 20 of 73
Astron Astrophys Rev (2013) 21:70
maximum energy may be due to a ﬁnite time of acceleration (the age of the remnant)
or to the existence of a spatial boundary, such that particles can leak out of the system
when they diffuse out to such boundary. Clearly in this second case, the physical
nature of such a boundary should be discussed.
At least three different deﬁnitions of the maximum energy should be considered,
and it is not always clear which deﬁnition works the best or best describes reality.
The ﬁrst deﬁnition consists in requiring that the acceleration time be smaller than the
age of the SNR (in case of electrons as accelerated particles the age of the remnant
should be replaced by the minimum between the age of the SNR and the time scale
for energy losses due to synchrotron and inverse Compton scattering (ICS) radiative
processes).
A rigorous calculation of the acceleration time was carried out by Drury (1983),
while a generalization of such a derivation in the context of the non-linear theory
of DSA was presented by Blasi et al. (2007). In this section I will illustrate a sim-
ple derivation of the acceleration time based on the very essential feature of DSA,
namely the fact that it proceeds through repeated shock crossings of individual parti-
cles. Let us consider a particle that from the upstream crosses the shock towards the
downstream, with a pitch angle μ1 and an energy E1. For simplicity let us assume
that the particle is already relativistic, so that p ≃E. As seen in the reference frame
of the downstream plasma the particle has energy
E2 = Γ E1(1 + βμ1),
0 ≤μ1 ≤1,
(42)
where β = (u1 −u2) is the relative velocity between the upstream and the down-
stream ﬂuid in units of the speed of light c, and Γ = (1 −β2)1/2. While in the down-
stream region, the particle does not gain or lose energy to ﬁrst order (there are the
usual second order effects that are neglected here). If the particle returns to the shock
it may recross its surface with a pitch angle with cosine −1 ≤μ2 ≤0, so that the
particle energy as seen again by an observer in the upstream ﬂuid is
E′
1 = Γ E2(1 −βμ2) = Γ 2E1(1 + βμ1)(1 −βμ2).
(43)
Notice that the ﬁnal energy of the particle after one full cycle upstream-downstream-
upstream (or downstream-upstream-downstream) is always E′
1 > E1, namely parti-
cles gain energy at each cycle. In the assumption that the distribution of particles is
isotropized by scatterings (diffusion) both upstream and downstream, the ﬂuxes on
both sides are normalized as 2|μ|. In other words
 1
0 dμAμ =
 0
−1 dμA|μ| = 1 →
A = 2. The mean value of the energy change per cycle is therefore (Bell 1978a):
E′
1 −E1
E1

μ1,μ2
= −
 1
0
dμ12μ1
 0
−1
dμ22μ2
	
Γ 2E1(1 + βμ1)(1 −βμ2) −1

= 4
3β.
(44)
The scaling of ⟨E
E ⟩with the ﬁrst power of β is the reason why DSA is often named
ﬁrst order Fermi acceleration.


===== PAGE 21 =====

P. Blasi: The origin of galactic cosmic rays
Page 21 of 73
In the assumption of isotropy, the ﬂux of particles that cross the shock from down-
stream to upstream is nsc/4, which means that the upstream section is ﬁlled through
a surface Σ of the shock in one diffusion time upstream with a number of parti-
cles ns(c/4)τdiff ,1Σ (ns is the density of accelerated particles at the shock). This
number must equal the total number of particles within a diffusion length upstream
L1 = D1/u1, namely:
ns
c
4Στdiff,1 = nsΣ D1
u1
,
(45)
which implies for the diffusion time upstream τdiff,1 = 4D1
cu1 . A similar estimate down-
stream leads to τdiff,2 = 4D2
cu2 , so that the duration of a full cycle across the shock is
τdiff = τdiff,1 + τdiff,2. The acceleration time is now:
τacc =
E
E/τdiff
=
3
u1 −u2
D1
u1
+ D2
u2

.
(46)
This should be compared with the formally correct and more general expression (La-
gage and Cesarsky 1983a, 1983b):
τacc =
3
u1 −u2
 p
0
dp′
p′
D1(p′)
u1
+ D2(p′)
u2

.
(47)
The two expressions return the same order of magnitude provided D(p) is an increas-
ing function of momentum.
Equation (47) effectively illustrates the fact that the acceleration time is dominated
by particle diffusion in the region with less scattering (larger diffusion coefﬁcient)
which in normal conditions is the region of the upstream ﬂuid.
The ﬁrst deﬁnition of maximum energy is that the acceleration time be smaller
than the age to the SNR τSNR. Using Eq. (32) for the diffusion coefﬁcient, and con-
centrating our attention on the upstream ﬂuid, one can write the condition for the
maximum energy as
1
3
rL(pmax)c
v2s F(kmin) ≈τSNR,
(48)
where kmin = 1/rL(pmax) is the wave number resonant with particles with momen-
tum pmax. Using the fact that for a SNR in its ejecta dominated phase vsτSNR ≈RSNR,
the radius of the SNR shell, the condition becomes
F(kmin) ≈1
3
c
vs
rL(pmax)
RSNR
.
(49)
This condition is rather interesting since at pmax, for reference values of the parame-
ters, one has
rL(pmax) = 1pc

E
1015 eV

B−1
μ ,
(50)
which is a fraction of order ∼0.1 of the size of young known SNRs in the ejecta
dominated phase or early stages of the Sedov–Taylor phase. Since c/vs ∼100 for


===== PAGE 22 =====

Page 22 of 73
Astron Astrophys Rev (2013) 21:70
the same cases, one immediately infers that in order for a SNR to be a PeVatron one
has to have F(kmin) ≫1, namely the random component of the magnetic ﬁeld on the
scale ∼rL(pmax) must be much larger than the pre-existing ordered magnetic ﬁeld,
δB/B0 ≫1. Clearly in these conditions the calculations that led us to the expression
Eq. (32) for the diffusion coefﬁcient fail since the random ﬁeld can no longer be
considered as a perturbation. These last few lines are sufﬁcient to illustrate one of the
problems that the ﬁeld of CR research has been facing for the last several decades: for
SNRs to behave as PeVatrons one has to invoke a physical mechanism that enhances
the turbulent magnetic ﬁeld upstream of a SNR shock by a factor ∼10–100 on all
scales up to rL(pmax). Notice that in the absence of such a mechanism, the maximum
energy achieved at a SNR shock is rather uninteresting. For instance, if the diffusion
coefﬁcient close to the shock were the same as inferred in the ISM from measure-
ments of the B/C ratio, the maximum energy that could be achieved at ∼1000 years
old SNR with the shock moving at 3000 km/s is only a fraction of GeV.
It is important to stress that since the acceleration time is dominated by the up-
stream conditions, the large magnetic ﬁeld ampliﬁcation is needed upstream, where
only accelerated particles can reach. It is therefore natural to expect, as was initially
proposed by Bell (1978a, 1978b) and Lagage and Cesarsky (1983a, 1983b) that the
magnetic ﬁeld may be excited by the same particles that are being accelerated. This
important aspect of DSA will be discussed in the context of the non-linear theory of
DSA in Sect. 4.
One last point is worth being mentioned concerning Eq. (49). One might argue
that increasing the radius of the SNR the condition on F may be relaxed, and that
acceleration of very high-energy CRs may take place at the late stages of the SNR.
This is, however, not plausible for several reasons: (1) after the beginning of the
Sedov–Taylor phase, the radius of the remnant increases slowly, therefore not much
changes in the constraint on F(kmin); (2) during the Sedov–Taylor phase the velocity
of the shock drops with time, therefore the acceleration time starts increasing, unless
the rate of magnetic ﬁeld ampliﬁcation gets larger, but in this case the constraint on
F(kmin) becomes even more severe. It is therefore plausible that the highest energy
in a SNR is reached sometimes during the ejecta dominated phase, and most likely
right before the beginning of the Sedov–Taylor phase.
An alternative deﬁnition of the maximum energy is inspired by the possibility of
free particle escape from a boundary located at some distance z0 = χRsh, with χ < 1.
This deﬁnition is more often used to describe the maximum energy during the Sedov–
Taylor phase, when particle escape should be easier because the shock slows down,
so that not only the probability for the highest energy particles to return to the shock
increases (see discussion in Sect. 6.1) but also the strength of the ampliﬁed magnetic
ﬁeld is likely to drop. The condition for the maximum momentum in this case can be
written as:
D(pmax)
Vsh
≈χRsh.
(51)
Again the highest value of pmax can be reached at the beginning of the Sedov–Taylor
phase, when one can approximately estimate the SNR radius as Rsh ≈VshTST, so that


===== PAGE 23 =====

P. Blasi: The origin of galactic cosmic rays
Page 23 of 73
Eq. (51) becomes
D(pmax)
V 2
sh
≈χTST.
(52)
Recalling that D(p)/V 2
sh is a rough estimate of the acceleration time, one easily re-
alizes that the condition in Eq. (52) is somewhat more restrictive than the one based
on comparing the acceleration time with the age of the SNR, since χ < 1.
The third deﬁnition of the maximum energy is purely geometric in nature and
should be used more as a solid upper limit rather than as an estimate of pmax. The
condition, which I will only mention here, consists in requiring that the Larmor radius
of the highest energy particles equal the size of the system, rL(pmax) = Rsh. Typically
this condition overestimates the value of pmax by ∼c/Vsh with respect to the second
deﬁnition discussed above.
All estimates of the diffusion coefﬁcient presented above are based on the frame-
work of particle acceleration at a quasi-parallel shock. Jokipii (1982, 1987) argued
that particle acceleration may be faster at oblique shocks (angle to the shock normal
larger than ∼30o) and be the fastest at perpendicular shocks (magnetic ﬁeld perpen-
dicular to the shock normal), even for δB/B < 1. At such shocks, particles can cross
the shock surface several times during Larmor gyrations while moving along the mag-
netic ﬁeld, and be thereby accelerated by the drifts associated to the electric ﬁelds that
the particles experience because of the different plasma velocity upstream and down-
stream of the shock. The weak point of this simple scenario is that the particles get
advected at the plasma speed, with the magnetic ﬁeld line that they are trapped on,
thereby reducing the time that they can stay in the shock region. On the other hand,
the random walk of magnetic ﬁeld lines may solve this problem, as discussed by
Giacalone (2005). The role of particle transport perpendicular to the ﬁeld lines is,
however, not yet completely understood: the theory that currently best describes par-
ticle diffusion perpendicular to ﬁeld lines was formulated by Matthaeus et al. (2003),
and shows how the perpendicular diffusion coefﬁcient depends in a non-trivial way
upon the parallel diffusion coefﬁcient, thereby creating serious problems in building
a self-consistent picture of particle acceleration at perpendicular shocks. However,
numerical simulations have showed that particle acceleration at perpendicular shocks
may be a promising mechanism to increase the maximum energy of accelerated par-
ticles beyond the limits discussed above (Giacalone 2005, 2013).
The two scenarios of effective magnetic ﬁeld ampliﬁcation and of perpendicular
shock conﬁguration (without magnetic ﬁeld ampliﬁcation) are often considered as
two alternative possibilities to shorten the acceleration time and lead to higher energy
particles. In fact reality can be appreciably more complex than that. For instance the
ﬁeld at the shock can become prevalently perpendicular as a result of magnetic ﬁeld
ampliﬁcation upstream with δB/B ≫1, since the perturbations are likely to evolve
mainly in the plane perpendicular to the pre-existing magnetic ﬁeld. Moreover, as
discussed by Giacalone (2005), the large scale behavior of the magnetic ﬁeld lines is
likely to speed up acceleration even for the case of parallel shocks, because when the
magnetic ﬁeld line crosses the shock, there is a ﬁnite probability that it happens to be
oblique with respect to the shock normal, so that drifts enhance the particle energy
gain. This complexity and its implications for particle acceleration to the highest
energies deserve much more attention than have received until now.


===== PAGE 24 =====

Page 24 of 73
Astron Astrophys Rev (2013) 21:70
4 The non-linear theory of diffusive shock acceleration
In the previous section I have outlined the main principles and the main limitations
of the test-particle theory of CR acceleration in SNR shocks. There are three main
reasons that justify the need for a non-linear theory of DSA:
(1) Dynamical reaction of accelerated particles.
For the typical rate of SNRs in the Galaxy, the acceleration efﬁciency per su-
pernova required to reproduce the CR energetics observed at Earth is of order
∼10 %. This implies that the pressure exerted by accelerated particles on the
plasma around the shock affects the shock dynamics as well as the acceleration
process. The non-linearity appears through the modiﬁcation of the compression
factor which in turn changes the spectrum of accelerated particles in a way that
in general depends upon particle rigidity.
Note also that while ∼10 % may be a reasonable estimate of the CR acceleration
efﬁciency averaged over the entire history of the remnant, there may be stages
during which the efﬁciency may be appreciably larger.
(2) Plasma instabilities induced by accelerated particles.
As I discussed above, SNRs can be the source of the bulk of CRs in the Galaxy,
up to rigidities of order ∼106 GV only if substantial magnetic ﬁeld ampliﬁcation
takes place at the shock surface. Since this process must take place upstream of
the shock in order to reduce the acceleration time, it is likely that it is driven
by the same accelerated particles, which would therefore determine the diffusion
coefﬁcient that describes their motion. The existence of magnetic ﬁeld ampliﬁ-
cation is also the most likely explanation of the observed bright, narrow X-ray
rims of non-thermal emission observed in virtually all young SNRs (see Vink
2012, Ballet 2006 for recent reviews). The non-linearity here reﬂects in the fact
that the diffusion coefﬁcient becomes dependent upon the distribution function
of accelerated particles, which is in turn determined by the diffusion coefﬁcient
in the acceleration region.
(3) Dynamical reaction of the ampliﬁed magnetic ﬁeld.
The magnetic ﬁelds required to explain the X-ray ﬁlaments are of order
100–1000μG. The magnetic pressure is therefore still a fraction of order
10−2–10−3 of the ram pressure ρv2
s for typical values of the parameters. How-
ever, the magnetic pressure may easily become larger than the upstream thermal
pressure of the incoming plasma, so as to affect the compression factor at the
shock. A change in the compression factor affects the spectrum of accelerated
particles which in turn determines the level of magnetic ﬁeld ampliﬁcation, an-
other non-linear aspect of DSA.
While a review of non-linear DSA (NLDSA) can be found in Malkov and Drury
(2001), here I will focus on the physical aspects of relevance for the calculations
of the spectrum and multifrequency appearance of SNRs. Mathematical subtleties,
when present, will be pointed out but not discussed in detail.
4.1 Dynamical reaction of accelerated particles
The dynamical reaction that accelerated particles exert on the shock is due to two
different effects: (1) the pressure in accelerated particles slows down the incoming


===== PAGE 25 =====

P. Blasi: The origin of galactic cosmic rays
Page 25 of 73
Fig. 7 Schematic view of a
cosmic-ray modiﬁed shock wave
in the shock frame. Upstream
inﬁnity is on the left (x = −∞),
where the plasma velocity is u0.
The CR pressure slows down the
inﬂowing plasma, so as to
reduce its bulk velocity to
u1 < u0 immediately upstream
of the subshock. The plasma in
then compressed and slowed
down at the subshock so that the
plasma velocity downstream is
u2 = u1/Rsub. The total
compression factor is
Rtot = u0/u2
upstream plasma as seen in the shock reference frame, thereby creating a precursor.
In terms of dynamics of the plasma, this leads to a compression factor that depends
on the location upstream of the shock (Drury and Voelk 1981; Axford et al. 1982).
(2) The escape of the highest energy particles from the shock region makes the shock
radiative (Berezhko and Ellison 1999), thereby inducing an increase of the compres-
sion factor between upstream inﬁnity and downstream. Both these effects result in a
modiﬁcation of the spectrum of accelerated particles, which turns out to be no longer
a perfect power law (Berezhko et al. 1994; Berezhko and Völk 1997; Berezhko and
Ellison 1999; Malkov 1999; Blasi 2002).
Before embarking in outlining a theory of NLDSA, it is useful to have a feeling of
the physical effects expected due to the dynamical reaction of accelerated particles on
the shock. A pictorial representation of the shock modiﬁcation induced by accelerated
particles is reported in Fig. 7: the plasma velocity at upstream inﬁnity (x = −∞) is
u0. While approaching the shock, a ﬂuid element experiences an increasing pressure
due to accelerated particles. This is the result of the fact that the diffusion coefﬁ-
cient is an increasing function of momentum, therefore at a position z upstream only
particles with energy E ≥Emin(z), with D(Emin)/vs ≈|z|, can reach that far. The
pressure of accelerated particles tends to slow down the incoming ﬂuid, so that a pre-
cursor is created, with the gas getting slower while approaching the shock surface.
Since the shock region becomes more complex in the presence of particle accelera-
tion, the term shock is usually used to refer to the whole region between upstream
inﬁnity and downstream inﬁnity, and is made of a precursor and a subshock, which
is now the sharp discontinuity produced in the background gas. If the spectrum were
∼E−2, the energy density would only scale logarithmically with Emin (for a given
Emax), therefore the precursor is spatially extended. For spectra steeper than E−2,
the energetics is dominated by low energies, therefore the precursor is concentrated
toward the subshock. On the other hand, it will be shown later that in the presence
of efﬁcient CR acceleration, the spectrum at high energies can become appreciably
harder than E−2, so as to make the total energy in the form of accelerated particles
dominated by the maximum energy.
Although the energy density in the form of accelerated particles may become com-
parable with the ram pressure ρu2, the number density of these particles remains neg-
ligible with respect to the density of the background plasma. Therefore the equation


===== PAGE 26 =====

Page 26 of 73
Astron Astrophys Rev (2013) 21:70
for mass conservation is
∂ρ
∂t + ∂
∂z(ρu) = 0.
(53)
The equation of motion of a ﬂuid element under the action of a gradient in the total
pressure is
ρ Du
Dt = −∂
∂z(Pg + Pc),
(54)
where D/Dt = ∂/∂t + u∂/∂z denotes the total time derivative and Pg and Pc are
the gas and cosmic-ray pressure respectively. After some simple algebra and using
Eq. (53) for mass conservation, one can easily rewrite this as
∂
∂t (ρu) = −∂
∂z
	
ρu2 + Pg + Pc

,
(55)
which can be viewed as the equation for momentum conservation in the presence
of accelerated particles. It is useful to introduce the energy per unit mass of ﬂuid as
ϵ = 1
2u2 +
Pg
ρ(γg−1), so that the energy per unit volume is ρϵ. The time derivative of
the energy per unit volume can therefore be written as:
∂
∂t (ρϵ) = −∂
∂z
	
(ρϵ + Pg)u

−u∂Pc
∂z ,
(56)
where I used the equations for conservation of mass and momentum and the condition
that on both sides of the subshock (but not at the subshock itself) the gas evolves
adiabatically:
DPg
Dt = −γgPg
du
dz .
(57)
Equations (53), (55) and (56) represent mass, momentum and energy conservation in
a plasma in which there are accelerated particles contributing a pressure Pc. In the
assumption of stationarity that is often adopted in calculations of particle acceleration
at SNR shocks, the three equations read
∂
∂z(ρu) = 0,
(58)
∂
∂z

ρu2 + Pg + Pc

= 0,
(59)
∂
∂z
1
2ρu3 +
γg
γg −1uPg

= −u∂Pc
∂z .
(60)
It is useful to notice that since the distribution function of accelerated particles is con-
tinuous across the subshock, Pc(z = 0−) = Pc(z = 0+), the conservation equations
at the subshock are those of an ordinary gas shock. The effect of accelerated particles
only reﬂects in the fact that the ﬂuid velocity immediately upstream of the subshock
is different from the one at upstream inﬁnity. In this sense, the subshock is a standard


===== PAGE 27 =====

P. Blasi: The origin of galactic cosmic rays
Page 27 of 73
gaseous shock, while the overall structure of the shock region may be heavily affected
by cosmic rays.
The dynamics of accelerated particles is deﬁned by the transport equation, which
I report here in its time-dependent form:
∂f
∂t + u∂f
∂z = ∂
∂z

D ∂f
∂z

+ 1
3
du
dz p ∂f
∂p + Q.
(61)
If T (p) is the kinetic energy of particles with momentum p, the energy density and
pressure of accelerated particles can be written as
Ec(z) =
 ∞
0
dp 4πp2T (p)f (p,z),
(62)
Pc(z) = 1
3
 ∞
0
dp4πp3v(p)f (p,z).
(63)
Integrating Eq. (61) in momentum space, and neglecting the small energy input at the
shock as due to injection, one gets:
∂Ec
∂t + u∂Ec
∂z = ∂
∂z

¯D ∂Ec
∂z

−Pc
du
dz + 1
3
du
dz
	
4πp3T (p)f (p,z)

p=∞
p=0 ,
(64)
where I introduced the mean diffusion coefﬁcient deﬁned as:
¯D(z) =
 ∞
0 dp 4πp2T (p)D(p) ∂f
∂z
 ∞
0 dp 4πp2T (p) ∂f
∂z
.
(65)
The last term in Eq. (64) requires some comments: in test-particle theory, the transport
equation (61) has a time-dependent solution with a steadily increasing maximum
momentum (if the shock velocity remains constant), namely there is no stationary
solution of that equation. A stationary solution would correspond to a power law
extending to inﬁnite energy, and for a strong shock this would lead to the last term in
Eq. (64) being ﬁnite. In the context of a non-linear theory of particle acceleration, the
situation is even worse since spectra can become harder than p−4, thereby making
the same term diverging. Clearly the system would be destroyed by CR pressure
before reaching that situation. A meaningful stationary solution (or a quasi-stationary
solution) can only be obtained by assuming the existence of a physical boundary at a
ﬁnite location z0 upstream, where particles escape from the acceleration region. This
corresponds to requiring f (z0,p) = 0, so as to have an escape ﬂux proportional to
the space derivative of the distribution function in z0 (which does not vanish). Within
this framework the distribution function has a strong suppression at pmax (see below)
and the last term in Eq. (64) vanishes. Hence Eq. (64) becomes
∂Ec
∂t + ∂
∂z

γc
γc −1uPc

= ∂
∂z

¯D ∂Ec
∂z

+ u∂Pc
∂z ,
(66)
where I introduced the adiabatic index of accelerated particles as Ec = Pc/(γc −1).
Equation (66) can be used to derive u∂Pc/∂z, to be substituted in Eq. (56) (Caprioli


===== PAGE 28 =====

Page 28 of 73
Astron Astrophys Rev (2013) 21:70
et al. 2009a):
∂
∂t
1
2ρu3 +
Pg
γg −1 + Ec

= −∂
∂z
1
2ρu3 +
γg
γg −1uPg +
γc
γc −1uPc

+ ∂
∂z

¯D ∂Ec
∂z

.
(67)
In the stationary regime the compression factor at the subshock can be written as a
function of the Mach number M1 of the ﬂuid immediately upstream of the subshock
in the usual way:
Rsub = u1
u2
= ρ2
ρ1
=
(γg + 1)M2
1
(γg −1)M2
1 + 2,
(68)
which can be obtained by integrating the equations of conservation of mass and mo-
mentum around the subshock. Integrating the same equations between immediately
upstream (z = 0−) and far upstream (z = z0) one also derives
Rtot = u0
u1
= M
2
γg+1
0
(γg + 1)Rγg
sub −(γg −1)Rγg+1
sub
2

1
γg+1
,
(69)
where I used the condition of adiabaticity of the upstream gas: M2
1 = M2
0( Rsub
Rtot )γg+1.
The total compression factor changes in case of non-adiabatic heating of the precur-
sor, for instance due to the damping of waves induced by accelerated particles (see
for instance Berezhko and Ellison 1999).
Finally, Eq. (67) can be used to determine Fesc = ¯D ∂Ec
∂z |z=z0 which has the mean-
ing of an escape ﬂux of energy in the form of accelerated particles. These equations
illustrate very clearly the formation of a cosmic-ray-induced precursor: for instance in
the limit in which the gas pressure upstream remains negligible compared with ρu2,
which is always true for strong shocks, the equation of conservation of momentum
can be written as
ξCR(z) ≈Pc(z)
ρ0u2
0
≈1 −u(z)
u0
,
(70)
where u(z) is the gas velocity at the position z upstream. Immediately upstream of
the shock the gas feels the largest CR pressure ξCR(0) = 1 −u1
u0 . In other words the
upstream gas is slowed down by the CR pressure by an amount which is directly
related to the fraction of the ram pressure ρ0u2
0 that gets converted to accelerated
particles.
Since the subshock is a gaseous shock (namely its dynamics is not affected by the
presence of accelerated particles), its compression factor is bound to be Rsub < 4,
while the total compression factor can potentially become large. In the absence of
particle escape, the net effect of the accelerated particles would be to change the
adiabatic index toward ∼4/3 (appropriate for a relativistic gas), therefore Rtot ∼7.
However, the escape of particles makes the shock radiative-like, so that Rtot can be-
come larger than 7, although I will show below that in all realistic calculations of


===== PAGE 29 =====

P. Blasi: The origin of galactic cosmic rays
Page 29 of 73
CR modiﬁed shocks both Rsub and Rtot stay rather close to 4, as a consequence of
additional non-linear effects that reduce the CR reaction.
The formation of a precursor upstream implies that the spectra of accelerated par-
ticles are no longer power laws. Physically this is easy to understand: particles with
momentum p diffuse upstream by a distance that is proportional to the diffusion co-
efﬁcient D(p), which is usually a growing function of momentum. This implies that
particles with low momentum experience a compression factor closer to Rsub < 4,
while higher momentum particles trace a compression factor closer to Rtot > 4. As
a consequence the spectrum is expected to be steeper than p−4 at low momenta and
harder than p−4 at high momenta, with the transition typically taking place around a
few GeV/c. From the mathematical point of view, the spectrum can be calculated by
solving together the non-linear CR transport equation, and the equations for conser-
vation of mass, momentum and energy. This has been done in at least three different
ways: (1) ﬁnite schemes of numerical integration (Berezhko and Völk 1997, 2000;
Zirakashvili and Ptuskin 2012), (2) Monte Carlo methods (Ellison and Eichler 1984;
Knerr et al. 1996; Vladimirov et al. 2008) and (3) semi-analytical (Malkov 1999,
1997; Blasi 2002, 2004; Amato and Blasi 2005, 2006). Each semi-analytical methods
has its pros and cons: calculations of the CR transport based on ﬁnite schemes of inte-
gration are best in tracking the temporal evolution of the whole system. Monte Carlo
methods could in principle be used to investigate non-diffusive effects of CRs close
to the maximum momentum. Both these methods are rather time-consuming and in
general it is problematic to use them together with hydrodynamical simulations of
a supernova evolution. Semi-analytical methods are computationally very fast and
easy to implement in more complex calculations involving simulations of supernova
evolution. The quasi-stationary solutions derived with quasi-analytical methods are
excellent approximations to the time-dependent solutions for given parameters, as
discussed by Caprioli et al. (2010b).
The encouraging agreement among these different methods of calculations of the
CR dynamical reaction allows us to deduce some general conclusions on these non-
linear effects: (1) the spectra of particles accelerated at a shock in the non-linear
regime are not perfect power laws. (2) Since a fraction ξCR of the ram pressure
ρ0u2
0 is channeled into accelerated particles, the thermal energy of particles down-
stream of the shock is less than would have been found in the absence of particle
acceleration. Both these effects are well illustrated in Fig. 8 (from Blasi et al. 2005),
where the distribution function of particles (thermal plus accelerated) is plotted (mul-
tiplied by p4). The three curves are obtained by changing the Mach number of the
shock by lowering the temperature of the upstream gas (the shock velocity is ﬁxed
at u0 = 5 × 108 km s−1. Increasing the Mach number causes the CR acceleration to
increase (the value of the maximum momentum is ﬁxed at pmax = 105 GeV/c) and
the spectra become increasingly more concave so as to reﬂect a more pronounced
CR-induced shock modiﬁcation. Moreover, while increasing the CR acceleration ef-
ﬁciency, the temperature of the downstream plasma drops, reﬂecting in the peak of
the Maxwellian distributions in Fig. 8 moving leftward. In Sect. 7 I will discuss the
implications of this phenomenon on the width of the broad Balmer line emission in
shocks where CR acceleration is efﬁcient.
The curvature in the spectrum is directly related to the formation of a precursor
upstream of the shock. The plasma compression in the precursor is directly related


===== PAGE 30 =====

Page 30 of 73
Astron Astrophys Rev (2013) 21:70
Fig. 8 Particle spectra (thermal plus non-thermal) at a CR modiﬁed shock with Mach number M0 = 10
(solid line), M0 = 50 (dashed line) and M0 = 100 (dotted line). The vertical dashed line is the loca-
tion of the thermal peak as expected for an ordinary shock with no particle acceleration (this value de-
pends very weakly on the Mach number, for strong shocks). The plasma velocity at upstream inﬁnity is
u0 = 5 × 108 cm/s, pmax = 105mpc and the injection parameter is ξ = 3.5 (Blasi et al. 2005)
not only to the pressure in the form of accelerated particles but also to any form of
non-adiabatic heating possibly associated with the presence of accelerated particles.
Non-adiabatic heating leads in general to a weakening of the precursor and in turn
to a reduction of the concavity in the spectra of accelerated particles. Since the most
natural source of non-adiabatic heating upstream is due to damping of the turbulent
component of magnetic ﬁelds, this phenomenon is related to the magnetic ﬁeld gen-
eration, discussed in the next section.
4.2 Magnetic ﬁeld ampliﬁcation
The phenomenon of magnetic ﬁeld ampliﬁcation is probably the most important man-
ifestation of the non-linearity of DSA. This role is related to both observational and
phenomenological reasons. From the observational point of view, the main evidence
for large magnetic ﬁelds in the shock region is represented by the observation of
narrow ﬁlaments of non-thermal X-ray radiation in virtually all young SNRs (Vink
2012; Ballet 2006). This radiation is the result of synchrotron emission from electrons
with energy Ee ≈8(
Eγ
100 eV)1/2B−1/2
100
TeV, where Eγ is the energy of the synchrotron
photons and B100 is the magnetic ﬁeld in units of 100μG. One can clearly see that
only electrons in the ∼10 TeV energy range can produce the X-rays observed from
the rims. Assuming Bohm diffusion for simplicity, the acceleration time can be esti-
mated as
τacc ≈3.3 × 107ETeVB−1
100V −2
sh,8 s,
(71)
where ETeV is the electron energy in TeV and Vsh,8 = Vsh/(108 cm/s). The syn-
chrotron loss time is
τsyn = 4 × 1010B−2
100E−1
TeV s.
(72)


===== PAGE 31 =====

P. Blasi: The origin of galactic cosmic rays
Page 31 of 73
Therefore the maximum electron energy is
Ee,max ≈34B−1/2
100 Vsh,8 TeV
(73)
and the energy of the synchrotron photons reads
Eγ,max ≈1.7V 2
sh,8 keV,
(74)
independent of the strength of the local magnetic ﬁeld. The independence of Eγ,max
on the value of B100 is a consequence of having assumed Bohm diffusion, and is not
a general result. In the same approximation of Bohm diffusion, the distance covered
by electrons with energy close to Ee,max before losing their energy can be estimated
as

D(Ee,max)τsyn ≈3.7 × 10−2B−3/2
100
pc.
(75)
At the distance of the young SNRs in which the bright X-ray rims have been observed,
the thickness of the rims corresponds to a physical scale of ∼10−2 pc, thereby im-
plying the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld of order several 100μG, to be compared with
the 1–6μG typically found in the ISM. The ﬁlaments are the best evidence so far that
magnetic ﬁelds in the shock region have been ampliﬁed by a factor ∼10 with respect
to the interstellar magnetic ﬁeld compressed at the shock.
Establishing the nature of this phenomenon is of the utmost importance. Mag-
netic ﬁeld ampliﬁcation could be produced by the shock corrugation, through a sort
of Richtmyer–Meshkov instability (Giacalone and Jokipii 2007; Sano et al. 2012) or
could be induced by the streaming of accelerated particles (see Schure et al. 2012
for a recent review), thereby representing a different aspect of the non-linear reaction
of CRs on the shock. There is a qualitative, extremely important difference between
these two scenarios: in the former, the ﬁeld is wrapped around and its strength en-
hanced in the downstream region only, while in the latter case the ampliﬁcation only
occurs upstream of the shock, and the ﬁeld is further compressed at the shock surface.
These two possibilities have profoundly different implications in terms of particle ac-
celeration, as discussed below.
Besides being needed in order to explain the thickness of the X-ray rims, magnetic
ﬁeld ampliﬁcation is also required as a crucial aspect of the SNR paradigm. Particle
acceleration as due to DSA requires effective diffusive conﬁnement of CRs close
to the shock surface in order to make it possible for the maximum energy to rise
up to ∼1015–1016 eV, as required by observations of CRs at Earth. This need is
well illustrated by the following simple estimate. If the diffusion coefﬁcient relevant
for particle acceleration at SNR shocks were the one derived in the ISM from the
measurement of the B/C ratio, D(E) ≈3 × 1028(E/10 GeV)δ cm2 s−1, with δ ≈
0.3–0.6, the acceleration time would be
τacc(E) ∼D(E)
V 2
sh
≈105

E
10 GeV
δ
V −2
sh,8 years,
(76)
which exceeds the typical duration of the free-expansion phase of a SNR in the ISM
even for low energies (for any reasonable value of δ). During the Sedov–Taylor phase


===== PAGE 32 =====

Page 32 of 73
Astron Astrophys Rev (2013) 21:70
the velocity of the expanding shock decreases, so that it is unlikely that the maximum
energy can appreciably increase during such stage, unless the magnetic ﬁeld increases
with time during this phase, which is not expected to happen.
This simple argument shows that CR acceleration in SNRs requires that magnetic
ﬁeld is disordered and ampliﬁed in the proximity of the shock so as to shorten the
acceleration time. For instance, if the diffusion coefﬁcient were Bohm-like with a
strength of 100μG, as suggested by X-ray observations, then the acceleration time
would read
τacc(E) ∼D(E)
V 2
sh
≈3.3 × 104E(GeV)V −2
sh,8B−1
100 s.
(77)
Comparing this time with the duration of the ejecta dominated phase of a supernova,
Ts, which for typical parameters is of order a few 100 years, one easily obtains
Emax ≈3 × 105 GeV B100

Ts
300 years

Vsh
1000 kms−1
2
.
(78)
Clearly faster shocks help reaching higher values of Emax by decreasing the advection
time ∼D(E)/V 2
sh, although it is worth keeping in mind that this also implies that there
is less time available for magnetic ﬁeld ampliﬁcation.
More realistic estimates of the maximum energy usually return somewhat lower
values. Equation (78) illustrates in a simple way the difﬁculty in reaching the energy
of the knee in SNR shocks. All parameters have to be chosen in the most optimistic
way so as to maximize Emax.
As mentioned above, magnetic ﬁeld ampliﬁcation can also be due to plasma re-
lated phenomena rather than to the presence of accelerated particles. One imple-
mentation of this idea was illustrated by Giacalone and Jokipii (2007): the shock
propagates in an inhomogeneous medium with density ﬂuctuations δρ/ρ ∼1. While
crossing the shock surface these inhomogeneities lead to shock corrugation and to the
development of eddies in which magnetic ﬁeld is frozen. The twist of the eddie may
lead to magnetic ﬁeld ampliﬁcation on time scales ∼Lc/u2, where Lc is the spatial
size of these regions with larger density and u2 is the plasma speed downstream of
the shock. Smaller scales also grow so as to form a power spectrum downstream. This
phenomenon could well be able to account for the observed thin X-ray ﬁlaments. The
acceleration time for particles at the shock is, however, not necessarily appreciably
reduced in that no ﬁeld ampliﬁcation occurs upstream. It turns out that this mecha-
nism may be effective in accelerating particles in the cases where the initial magnetic
ﬁeld is perpendicular to the shock normal. In fact in this case the particles’ return
from the upstream region is geometrically easier and may potentially occur in just
one Larmor gyration. It seems unlikely that this scenario, so strongly dependent upon
the geometry of the system, may lead to a general solution of how to reach the highest
energies in Galactic CRs, but this possibility deﬁnitely deserves more attention.
It has been known for quite some time that the super-Alfvénic streaming of
charged particles in a plasma leads to the excitation of an instability (Skilling 1975b).
The role of this instability in the process of particle acceleration in SNR shocks
was recognized and its implications were discussed by many authors, most notably
Zweibel (1979) and Achterberg (1983). The initial investigation of this instability


===== PAGE 33 =====

P. Blasi: The origin of galactic cosmic rays
Page 33 of 73
led to identify as crucial the growth of resonant waves with wavenumber k = 1/rL,
where rL is the Larmor radius of the particles generating the instability. The waves
are therefore generated through a collective effect of the streaming of CRs but can
be resonantly absorbed by individual particles thereby leading to their pitch angle
diffusion. The resonance condition, taken at face value, would lead to expect that
the growth stops when the turbulent magnetic ﬁeld becomes of the same order as
the pre-existing ordered magnetic ﬁeld δB ∼B0, so that the saturation level of this
instability has often been assumed to occur when δB/B ∼1. Lagage and Cesarsky
(1983a, 1983b) used this fact to conclude that the maximum energy that can possi-
bly be reached in SNRs when the accelerated particles generate their own scattering
centers is ≲104–105 GeV/n, well below the energy of the knee. Hence, though the
streaming instability leads to an appealing self-generation of the waves responsible
for particle diffusion, the intrinsic resonant nature of the instability would inhibit the
possibility to reach sufﬁciently high energy. It is important to notice that the problem
with this instability is not the time scale, but again the resonant nature that forces
δB/B ∼1. In fact, the growth rate of the streaming instability can easily be found to
be (see Sect. 4.2.1):
ΓCR(k) = π
8 Ω∗
p
Vsh
VA
nCR(p > pres(k))
ni
,
(79)
where Ω∗
p is the proton cyclotron frequency, nCR(p > pres(k)) is the CR density with
momentum p > pres(k), where pres(k) = Ω∗
pmp/k is the minimum momentum of
particles that can resonate with waves with wavenumber k and ni is the density of
ionized gas in the background plasma (here it was assumed that Vsh ≫VA).
If we introduce the power per unit logarithmic wavenumber F(k), the diffusion
coefﬁcient that rules particle acceleration is D(p) ≃1
3rL(p)v(p)
1
F(k), and F(k) sat-
isﬁes the advection equation
Vsh
∂F
∂z = σ(k)F(z,k),
(80)
where σ(k) = 2ΓCR(k) is the growth rate for the quantity δB2. It is easy to solve this
equation analytically if we assume that the spectrum of accelerated particles is the
standard ∝p−4, so as to obtain the result that the power spectrum at the location of
the shock is
F0(k) = π
4 ξCR
Vsh
VA
1
Λ,
(81)
where ξCR is the fraction of ρV 2
sh that is converted to accelerated particles and
Λ = log(pmax/mpc). Equation (80) reﬂects the fact that waves grow upstream of
the shock while advecting towards the shock. In other words, the time available for
wave growth is the advection time of a ﬂuid element in the upstream, which is of
order D(p)/V 2
sh. This is a sort of upper limit to the growth of waves, in that satu-
ration might intervene at earlier times because of damping or, as mentioned above,
because the growth rate gets suppressed when F ∼1. For canonical values of the
parameters in Eq. (81) (ξCR = 0.1, Vsh = 5000 km/s, VA = 3 km/s, Λ ≈10), one can
see that F0 ≫1, hence the CR-induced streaming instability may potentially play a


===== PAGE 34 =====

Page 34 of 73
Astron Astrophys Rev (2013) 21:70
crucial role in amplifying the magnetic ﬁeld upstream of the shock and enhance the
scattering of accelerating particles. Moreover, for spectrum nCR(p) ∼p−4 the power
spectrum F0(k) is independent of k, thereby implying that the diffusion coefﬁcient is
Bohm-like D(p) ∝v(p)p.
This qualitative conclusion is, however, challenged by numerous theoretical and
practical difﬁculties: ﬁrst, when F > 1 one qualitatively expects that the resonance
condition be broken, which considerably reduces the impact of this instability; sec-
ond, as I show in next section, for acceleration efﬁciencies ξCR ∼10 % or larger the
growth rate is profoundly changed, the excited waves are no longer Alfvén waves and
the saturation level is considerably reduced.
4.2.1 Resonant streaming instability induced by accelerated particles
In the reference frame of the shock the distribution of accelerated particles is ap-
proximately isotropic, while the background upstream plasma (made of protons and
electrons) moves towards the shock with velocity Vsh. The condition that the total
charge density vanishes at any point upstream reads
nCR + ni = ne,
(82)
where nCR, ni and ne are the density of accelerated particles, ions and electrons
respectively. Moreover the total electric current must also vanish, which implies
nivi = neve.
(83)
Since mp ≫me we can make the assumption that electrons react more promptly than
protons, so that vi ≈Vsh and
ve = Vsh
ni
nCR + ni
≈Vsh

1 −nCR
ni

,
(84)
where I also assumed nCR ≪ni, which is usually the case. The background plasma
reacts to CRs moving with the shock by creating a current (relative drift between
electrons and ions) that cancels the excess positive charge contributed by CRs, as-
sumed here to be all protons. The dispersion relation of waves with wavenumber k
and frequency ω allowed in a system made of CRs, background ions and electrons
can be written in a general form as:
c2k2
ω2 = 1 +

α
4π2q2
α
ω

dp

dμp2v(p)(1 −μ2)
ω −kvμ ± Ωα
∂f0,α
∂p
+ 1
p
vk
ω −μ
∂f0,α
∂μ

,
(85)
where f0,α(p,μ) is the unperturbed distribution function of particles of type α =
CR,i,e. Here Ωα = qαB0/mαc is the cyclotron frequency of the species α.
Here we ﬁrst consider the solutions of the dispersion relation in the regime of low
frequency waves, ω ≪kVsh. The resulting frequency is in general a complex function
of k, and the sign of the imaginary part of the frequency provides information on the
growth or damping of the waves. The real part of the frequency describes the type of
waves that get excited.


===== PAGE 35 =====

P. Blasi: The origin of galactic cosmic rays
Page 35 of 73
For simplicity let us consider the case of a spectrum of accelerated particles coin-
cident with the canonical DSA spectrum fCR,0(p) ∝p−4 for γmin ≤p/mpc ≤γmax.
In the case of small CR efﬁciency, namely when the condition
nCR
ni
≪v2
A
Vshc
(86)
is fulﬁlled (Zweibel 1979; Achterberg 1983), it is easy to show that Alfvén waves are
excited (namely Re[ω] ≈kvA) and their growth rate is
Im[ω](k) ≡ωI(k) = π
8 Ω∗
p
Vsh
vA
nCR(p > pres(k))
ni
.
(87)
This is the same growth rate as quoted in the previous section and used for the es-
timates of the maximum energy of accelerated particles (the factor 2 difference be-
tween Eqs. (87) and (79) is due to the fact that σ = 2ωI ). The same expression can
also be used to estimate the growth rate of Alfvén waves excited in the Galaxy dur-
ing propagation of CRs, if Vsh is replaced with ∼2vA. It is, however, very important
to notice that for the usual nominal values of parameters, the condition in Eq. (86)
reads nCR
ni ≪10−7. As an order of magnitude the density of CRs can be related to the
efﬁciency as nCR
ni ≈3ξCR
γminΛ( Vsh
c )2. Therefore Eq. (86) becomes
ξCR ≪γminΛ
3
 vA
Vsh
2 c
Vsh
≈8 × 10−4

Vsh
5 × 108 cm/s
−3
,
(88)
which is typically much smaller than the value ξCR ∼10 % which is required of SNRs
to be the sources of the bulk of Galactic CRs. It follows that in phases in which the
SNR accelerates CRs most effectively the growth rate proceeds in a different regime.
This regime was already investigated in the pioneering papers by Zweibel (1979)
and Achterberg (1983) where it is referred to as cosmic-ray modiﬁed regime. Two
important effects come into play: (1) the excited waves are no longer pure Alfvén
waves, in that imaginary and real part of the frequency become comparable, and (2)
their growth rate acquires different scalings with the physical quantities involved in
the problem.
In this regime, which occurs when Eq. (86) is not fulﬁlled, the solution of the
dispersion relation for krL,0 ≤1, namely for waves that can resonate with particles
in the spectrum of accelerated particles (γ ≥γmin) becomes
ωI ≈ωR =
π
8 Ω∗
pkVsh
nCR(p > pres(k))
ni
1/2
.
(89)
Since nCR(p > pres(k)) ∝p−1
res ∼k, it follows that ω ∝k for krL,0 ≤1, but the phase
velocity of the waves vφ = ωR/k ≫vA. The fact that the phase velocity of these
waves exceeds the Alfvén speed may affect the spectrum of particles accelerated at
the shock.


===== PAGE 36 =====

Page 36 of 73
Astron Astrophys Rev (2013) 21:70
One can repeat the calculation of the saturation of the turbulent magnetic ﬁeld as
due to advection alone, upstream of the shock, as done above (see Eq. (80)), but using
now the growth rate appropriate for the case of efﬁcient CR acceleration at the shock.
It is easy to calculate the power spectrum at the shock location:
F0(k) =
π
6
1/2ξCR
Λ
1/2 c
Vsh
1/2
.
(90)
For the usual canonical values of the parameters, one ﬁnds F0 ≲1, hence the effect
of efﬁcient CR acceleration is such as to reduce the growth of the waves and limit
the value of the self-generated magnetic ﬁeld to the same order of magnitude as the
pre-existing magnetic ﬁeld. Magnetic ﬁeld damping may possibly make the problem
even more severe.
4.2.2 Non-resonant small-scale modes from streaming instability induced by
accelerated particles
The solution of the dispersion equation, Eq. (85) contains more modes than the res-
onant ones discussed above. Bell (2004, 2005) noticed that when the condition in
Eq. (86) is violated, namely when
ξCR > γminΛ
3
 vA
Vsh
2 c
Vsh
,
(91)
the right-hand polarized mode develops a non-resonant branch for krL,0 > 1 (spatial
scales smaller than the Larmor radius of all the particles in the spectrum of accel-
erated particles), with a growth rate that keeps increasing proportional to k1/2 and
reaches a maximum for
k∗rL,0 = 3ξCRγmin
Λ
Vsh
vA
2 Vsh
c > 1,
(92)
which is a factor (k∗rL,0)1/2 larger than the growth rate of the resonant mode at
krL,0 = 1. This non-resonant mode has several interesting aspects: ﬁrst, it is current
driven, but the current that is responsible for the appearance of this mode is the return
current induced in the background plasma by the CR current. The fact that the return
current is made of electrons moving with respect to protons is the physical reason
for these modes developing on small scales (electrons in the background plasma have
very low energy) and right-hand polarized. Second, the growth of these modes, when
they exist, is very fast for high speed shocks, however, they cannot resonate with CR
particles because their scale is much smaller than the Larmor radius of any particles
at the shock. On the other hand, it was shown that the growth of these modes leads to
the formation of complex structures: ﬂux tubes form, which appear to be organized
on large spatial scales (Reville and Bell 2012) and ions are expelled from these tubes
thereby inducing the formation of density perturbations. At present it is not clear
whether the growth may lead to the formation of magnetic perturbations on scales
relevant for scattering of CRs with energy ≥105 GeV (see discussion in Sect. 4.2.3).


===== PAGE 37 =====

P. Blasi: The origin of galactic cosmic rays
Page 37 of 73
Fig. 9 Real and imaginary parts of the frequency as a function of wavenumber for the resonant (top
panel) and non-resonant (bottom panel) modes, as calculated in (Amato and Blasi 2009). Wavenumbers
are in units of 1/rL,0, while frequencies are in units of V 2
sh/(crL,0). In each panel, the solid (dashed)
curve represents the real (imaginary) part of the frequency. The values of the parameters are as follows:
Vsh = 109 cms−1, B0 = 1μG, n = 1 cm−3, ξCR = 10 % and pmax = 105mpc
The situation described above is well illustrated in Fig. 9, taken from a paper by
Amato and Blasi (2009). The top (bottom) panel refers to the left-hand (right-hand)
polarized mode for a case with strong CR modiﬁcation of the waves (ξCR = 10 %).
In both plots the real and imaginary part of the frequency are plotted as a solid and
dashed line respectively. In this plot, the concept of resonant and non-resonant should
be understood in terms of left-hand and right-hand polarization of the waves. In fact
one can see that the resonant part of the dispersion relation (krL,0 ≤1) is present
in both panels, namely these modes are excited irrespective of the polarization (this
would not be true in the case of low acceleration efﬁciency, in which only left-hand
modes are excited). In addition to the waves that can resonate with protons, the right-
hand branch also has modes that grow for krL,0 ≥1, as discussed above. For the set
of parameters used in Fig. 9, the maximum growth occurs for k∗rL,0 ∼104. One can
also notice how the real part of the frequency of the fast growing modes is very small:
these modes are basically almost purely growing.
Finally, it is worth recalling that damping considerably reduces the region of pa-
rameter space where the Bell modes may effectively grow and give rise to the strongly
non-linear phase of development of the instability (Zweibel and Everett 2010).
The problem of particle acceleration at SNR shocks in the presence of small-scale
turbulence generated by the growth of the non-resonant mode was studied numeri-
cally by Zirakashvili et al. (2008), where maximum energies of the order to 105 GeV
were found, as a result of the fact that at the highest energies the scattering proceeds
in the small deﬂection angle regime D(p) ∝p2. This ﬁnding reﬂects the difﬁculty of
small-scale waves to resonate with particles, irrespective of how fast the modes grow.
Recently Bykov et al. (2009, 2011b) proposed that the growth of the fast non-
resonant mode may in fact also enhance the growth of waves with krL,0 < 1. If this
process were conﬁrmed by numerical calculations of the instability (current calcula-
tions are all carried out in the quasi-linear regime), it might provide a way to over-


===== PAGE 38 =====

Page 38 of 73
Astron Astrophys Rev (2013) 21:70
come the problem of inefﬁcient scattering of accelerated particles off the existing
turbulence around SNR shocks.
4.2.3 Filamentation instability
Recent work has shown that the non-linear development of CR-induced magnetic
ﬁeld ampliﬁcation is more complex than illustrated above. There is no doubt that the
small-scale non-resonant instability (Bell 2004) is very fast, provided the accelera-
tion efﬁciency is large enough. The question is what happens to these modes while
they grow. Both MHD simulations (Bell 2004) and Particle-in-Cell simulations of
this instability carried out by Riquelme and Spitkovsky (2009) show how the growth
leads to the development of modes on larger spatial scales. In recent numerical work
(Reville and Bell 2012; Caprioli and Spitkovsky 2013) it has been shown that the
current of CRs escaping the system induces the formation of ﬁlaments: the back-
ground plasma inside such ﬁlaments gets expelled from the ﬁlaments because of the
J × B force. Different ﬁlaments attract each other as two currents would and give
rise to ﬁlaments with larger cross section. Interestingly this instability, which might
be a natural development of Bell’s instability to a strongly non-linear regime, leads
to magnetic ﬁeld ampliﬁcation on a spatial scale comparable with the Larmor radius
of particles in the CR current. However, since the current is made of particles that
are trying to escape the system, the instability leads to a sort of self-conﬁnement.
The picture that seems to be arising consists in a possibly self-consistent scenario in
which the highest energy particles (whichever that may be) generate turbulence on
the scale of their own Larmor radius, thereby allowing particles of the same energy
to return to the shock and sustain DSA (Bell et al. 2013; Reville and Bell 2013).
Bell et al. (2013) have recently discussed the importance of the ﬁlamentation insta-
bility in achieving PeV energies in young SNRs. The authors estimated the current of
particles escaping at pmax as a function of the shock velocity and concluded that the
rate of growth of the instability is such as to allow young SNRs to reach ∼200 TeV
energies for shock velocity Vsh ∼5000 km/s (typical of SNRs such as Tycho), falling
short of the knee by about one order of magnitude. A possible conclusion of this
study might be that SNRs with an even larger velocity (therefore much younger) may
be responsible for acceleration of PeV CRs. The issue of whether such young SNRs
may have plowed enough material (and therefore accelerated enough particles) to ac-
count for the actual ﬂuxes of CRs observed at Earth remains to be addressed. It is
worth recalling that the argument discussed above, if applied to scenarios involving
SNe type Ib, Ic where it has been speculated that the maximum rigidity may be as
high as ∼1017 V (Ptuskin et al. 2010), imply considerably lower maximum energies.
Future detection of CR protons of Galactic origin in such high-energy region would
be hardly reconcilable with DSA in SNRs of any type.
4.2.4 Non-resonant large scale streaming instability induced by accelerated
particles
In addition to the resonant and non-resonant modes discussed above, the dispersion
relation Eq. (85) also returns a large scale non-resonant mode, basically a ﬁrehose in-
stability. This instability excites waves with wavenumber smaller than the 1/rL,max,


===== PAGE 39 =====

P. Blasi: The origin of galactic cosmic rays
Page 39 of 73
where rL,max is the Larmor radius of particles at some maximum momentum pmax.
The instability is excited due to the anisotropy of the distribution function of acceler-
ated particles, similar to the standard ﬁrehose instability that requires an anisotropic
pressure. Interestingly the relevant anisotropy is the quadrupole rather than the dipole
anisotropy (see the review paper by Bykov et al. 2013 for a discussion of this issue).
The growth rate of the ﬁrehose instability can be written as
ΓFH(k) ≃ξ1/2
CR
V 2
shk
c
.
(93)
Since k ≪1/rL,max and τadv(pmax) = rL,maxc/V 2
sh can be used as an estimate of
the advection time of particles at pmax, it follows that ΓFHτadv(pmax) ≪ξ1/2
CR < 1,
namely the instability is unlikely to have enough time to grow to a level that can be
important for particles at pmax. On the other hand, the distribution of particles escap-
ing the system could be much more anisotropic than what is implied by the diffusive
approximation and hence enhance the effectiveness of the ﬁrehose instability.
4.3 The dynamical reaction of ampliﬁed magnetic ﬁelds on the shock
A third aspect of the non-linearity of CR acceleration at shocks consists of the dy-
namical reaction of magnetic ﬁelds produced upstream by CRs on the shock itself.
The theoretical aspects of this phenomenon at CR modiﬁed shocks were developed
by Caprioli et al. (2008, 2009b). I will refer to these papers for mathematical details,
which basically represent the generalization of the conservation equations discussed
in Sect. 4.1 to the case where magnetic ﬁelds are present. The conservation of mass
and momentum read
∂
∂z(ρu) = 0,
(94)
∂
∂z

ρu2 + Pg + Pc + Pw

= 0,
(95)
where Pw is the pressure in the form of waves. As discussed by Caprioli et al. (2008),
the dynamical reaction of the ampliﬁed magnetic ﬁeld can be understood by focusing
on what happens at the subshock, where energy conservation reads
1
2ρu3 +
γg
γg −1uPg + Fw
2
1
= 0,
(96)
where I used the continuity of the CR distribution function (and therefore pressure)
across the subshock. As usual the indices 1 and 2 denote quantities immediately up-
stream and downstream of the subshock respectively. Here Fw is the ﬂux of waves
with pressure Pw. The connection between Pw and Fw is speciﬁc of the type of waves
that are being studies, which unfortunately limits the applicability of the conclusions
to the same cases. Caprioli et al. (2008, 2009b) only considered the case of Alfvén
waves, for which
Pw = 1
8π

i
δBi
2
,
Fw =

i
δB2
i
4π (u + Hc,ivA) + Pwu,
(97)


===== PAGE 40 =====

Page 40 of 73
Astron Astrophys Rev (2013) 21:70
where H = ±1 is the wave helicity. The calculations illustrated in Sect. 4.1 can be
repeated including the effect of waves, so as to obtain the expression connecting Rsub
(compression factor at the subshock) and Rtot (total compression factor):
Rγg+1
tot
= M2
0Rγg
sub
2
γg + 1 −Rsub(γg −1)
1 + ΛB

,
(98)
where
ΛB = W
	
1 + Rsub(2/γg −1)

,
W = Pw,1
Pg,1
.
(99)
The dynamical reaction of the ampliﬁed magnetic ﬁeld is regulated by the quan-
tity ΛB, which in turn is determined by the ratio W between the pressure in the form
of waves and the thermal pressure immediately upstream of the subshock. If W ≪1
the dynamical reaction of the magnetic ﬁeld is negligible, while for W ≳1 the total
compression factor gets reduced (Eq. (98)): the effect of the magnetic ﬁeld is that
of reducing the plasma compressibility when the magnetic pressure becomes compa-
rable with the thermal pressure of the upstream gas, thereby acting in the direction
opposite to that of CRs, which lead to larger values of Rtot. This is the reason why tak-
ing into account the effect of magnetic ﬁelds on the shock dynamics leads to predict
less modiﬁed shocks, and correspondingly less concave spectra of accelerated parti-
cles (Caprioli et al. 2009b). The values of magnetic ﬁelds inferred from the thickness
of the X-ray rims typically corresponds to W ∼1–10, if the ﬁeld is interpreted as CR
induced. Hence the magnetic dynamical reaction described above is certainly impor-
tant and it has been shown to have a considerable impact on the spectra of accelerated
particles, making them closer to power laws.
4.4 A critical summary of magnetic ﬁeld ampliﬁcation mechanisms
The X-ray ﬁlaments observed in virtually all young SNRs are the strongest evidence
so far that magnetic ﬁeld ampliﬁcation takes place close to the shock. Is this the same
magnetic ﬁeld that is responsible for particle acceleration up to the knee?
In the standard theory of diffusive particle transport at shocks, scattering occurs
efﬁciently at resonance, namely when the particle encounters a wave with wavenum-
ber k ≃1/rL. This requires that sufﬁcient power exists in the magnetic spectrum at
the resonant wavenumber, so as to lead to the required scattering frequency. In the
sections above I have discussed several nuances of the excitation of resonant insta-
bilities and for all of them the case can be made that they grow too slowly. In general
the strength of the magnetic ﬁeld only grows to δB ∼B for waves excited by the
CRs when they are efﬁciently accelerated (ξCR larger than few percent). Clearly if
the instability led to δB > B one could argue that the resonance condition would be
ill deﬁned. In this case the perturbative approach intrinsic in the quasi-linear theory
would reveal itself as being utterly inadequate. On the other hand, the non-resonant
mode ﬁrst discussed by Bell (2004) (but see also Lucek and Bell 2000, Bell and Lucek
2001) has a growth rate which can be much larger than any other unstable mode, and
can certainly lead to large magnetic ﬁelds at the shock. However, the scales that get
excited by the instability are very small compared with the gyration radii of acceler-
ated particles and although their growth also leads to power transfer to larger scales


===== PAGE 41 =====

P. Blasi: The origin of galactic cosmic rays
Page 41 of 73
(a sort of inverse cascade Bell 2004), it is unlikely that this process may continue up
to the scales comparable with the larmor radius of particles of 105–106 GeV, because
of the limited time available for the process to occur (roughly one advection time).
Moreover, the current that induces the instability is dominated by low energy particles
(say GeV particles), hence it is not easy to envision a mechanism that should move
power to scales much larger than the Larmor radius of the particles representing the
bulk of the current.
In addition to the CR-induced instabilities discussed above, there are also ﬂuid
instabilities (e.g. see Giacalone and Jokipii 2007) that only amplify magnetic ﬁeld
downstream of the shock if a density inhomogeneity is present upstream on suitably
chosen scales. In this case the scattering of particles upstream of the shock is not
affected by the ampliﬁcation process.
We could speculate that the instabilities discussed above, and more speciﬁcally
the non-resonant modes ﬁrst found by Bell (2004), play a crucial role in the produc-
tion of the magnetic ﬁeld as inferred from the X-ray morphology, while the same
instabilities might be less important to warrant the necessary level of particle scatter-
ing to reach high energies. What would then be the mechanism to energize CRs to
the knee energy? Clearly this question is still open and it may be worth keeping an
open mind on how to address it. As discussed above, a possible way out might come
from the investigation of the ﬁlamentation instability excited by particles escaping
the acceleration region.
A very important role in understanding the role of the different types of CR-
induced instabilities in SNR shocks is being played by hybrid numerical simulations,
in which the protons in the background plasma are treated by using a kinetic ap-
proach, while electrons are treated as a ﬂuid. This approach allows one to take into
account a larger range of spatial scales with respect to Particle-in-cell (PIC) simula-
tions, which are more appropriate for the investigation of the initial stages of particle
acceleration (injection). Hybrid simulations have recently been used to investigate
the role of shock obliquity in the process of particle acceleration and magnetic ﬁeld
ampliﬁcation (Gargaté and Spitkovsky 2012; Caprioli and Spitkovsky 2013). Un-
fortunately, even with hybrid simulations it is, at present, difﬁcult to describe the
complex interplay between large and small scales that is so important in astrophysi-
cal sources of high-energy particles: for instance, the dynamics of the shock is often
dominated by the highest energy particles, which diffuse further away from the shock
and probably play a crucial role in seeding magnetic instabilities (see for instance Bell
et al. 2013), but these scales may be very large compared with the computation box.
Another instance is in the random walk of magnetic ﬁeld lines on very large scales
(comparable with the size of a SNR) that facilitates the process of particles’ return
to the shock surface in oblique shocks, and that would not be properly described in
current hybrid simulations.
In the section below I also discuss a more mondane possibility that has been often
discussed in the literature and yet received less attention than it deserved, namely
the possibility that the bulk of Galactic CRs is accelerated in superbubbles excavated
in the ISM by repeated SN explosions, rather than in isolated SNRs. These regions
are very active in that several SNRs occur in a relatively short period of time (a few
tens million years), and conditions might be better suited for particle acceleration to
higher energies.


===== PAGE 42 =====

Page 42 of 73
Astron Astrophys Rev (2013) 21:70
5 The superbubble hypothesis
Massive stars form mainly in the cores of dense molecular clouds in a time span that
is only a few million years long. This short time inhibits the stars from acquiring a
peculiar velocity larger than ∼2 km/s, so that these stars explode basically within a
few tens of parsecs from the place where they were born. Stars of type O and B are
typically characterized by intense stellar winds with an energy injection which is of
the same order of magnitude as the energy liberated at the time of the supernova event
associated with the end of the nuclear reactions in the parent stars. It has been esti-
mated that ∼85 % of the core-collapse SNe in the Galaxy occur in these superbubbles
(Higdon and Lingenfelter 2005 and references therein), excavated by the collective
action of the stellar winds of O and B stars.
The launching of the stellar winds pollutes the circumstellar region with heavy
elements synthesized in the stellar interior due to nuclear reactions, therefore it may
be expected that the SN explosion due to the core collapse of the parent stars take
place in a metal enriched medium. It has been advocated that this may explain some
anomalies in the chemical composition of CRs, most notably the overabundance of
refractory elements and the 22Ne abundance (Higdon and Lingenfelter 2005, 2006,
2013).
It is easy to realize that the environment in which the OB association is located is
profoundly changed by the collective action of the stellar winds and the SN explo-
sions, all within a few million years time span. In principle particle acceleration may
be taking place in this environment due to several different processes, from shock
acceleration in the winds, to shock acceleration at shocks formed during supernova
explosions, to second order acceleration in the turbulent magnetic ﬁeld deriving from
merging winds and SN ejecta. These processes have been studied for instance by
Bykov and Toptygin (2001) and Parizot et al. (2004), and the calculations seem to
show a general trend to very hard spectra of accelerated particles. It has also been
proposed that the maximum energy that can be achieved is higher than in isolated
SNR, although these estimates are somewhat based on simple arguments that may
fail to properly represent reality. Nonetheless, as a qualitative statement, it is clear
that a place with enhanced background turbulence may in principle be better suited
to make acceleration faster, thereby allowing us to infer higher values of the maxi-
mum energy. The problem of how to reconcile the hard injection spectra with those
observed at the Earth remains to be properly addressed.
Recently the Fermi-LAT telescope has found the ﬁrst direct evidence for gamma-
ray emission that can be attributed to freshly accelerated CRs in the Cygnus region
(Ackermann et al. 2011), an OB association at 1.4 kpc distance from the Sun. The
spectrum of the gamma radiation is appreciably harder than the average Galactic
gamma-ray spectrum, again supporting the hypothesis that the parent CRs have been
produced at a location close to the emission region.
6 Indirect evidence for CR acceleration in SNRs
There is no doubt that SNRs are sites of cosmic-ray acceleration. The subject of the
debate is whether all CRs are accelerated in SNRs, and which SNRs or which phases


===== PAGE 43 =====

P. Blasi: The origin of galactic cosmic rays
Page 43 of 73
of a SNR may possibly allow for CR acceleration up to the energy of the knee. This
conﬁdence is based on direct observation of the radiation produced by CRs while
being accelerated inside the sources. SNRs have long been known as radio and X-ray
sources, while gamma-ray emission extending to >TeV energies has been detected
more recently.
Radio emission is associated with synchrotron emission of non-thermal electrons,
accelerated at the SNR shock. Electrons with energy E would radiate at frequency
ν ≃3.7 MHz BμE(GeV)2. It is easy to see how the phenomenon of magnetic ﬁeld
ampliﬁcation affects very profoundly the radio emission, in two ways: (1) if the ﬁeld
is ampliﬁed to values of, say, 100μG, the electrons responsible for GHz radio waves
have energy E ∼1–2 GeV, while if the magnetic ﬁeld were not ampliﬁed the cor-
responding electron energy would be ∼10–20 GeV. The electron spectra in these
two energy regions might carry information on the acceleration process: for instance
in the theory of NLDSA with strong dynamical reaction of accelerated particles the
spectrum is somewhat steeper (softer) at ∼GeV energies than it is at ∼10 GeV, which
might reﬂect into a similar hardening in the spectrum of radio emission. This effect
is more pronounced when comparing the spectrum of GeV electrons with that of
particles responsible for synchrotron X-rays. X-ray radiation at 1 keV requires elec-
trons with energy ∼20–30 TeV for a 100μG magnetic ﬁeld, therefore the concavity
might be visible if one considers together radio and X-ray emission. (2) Moreover, the
strong dependence of synchrotron losses from magnetic ﬁeld strength implies that at
given photon frequency less electrons are needed in order to explain the synchrotron
emission. This reﬂects in a smaller value of the ratio between electrons and protons
in the GeV range, what is usually referred to as Kep. A general feature of NLDSA
is to require very low values of this ratio, Kep ∼10−3–10−4 as a consequence of
magnetic ﬁeld ampliﬁcation. The value of Kep measured at the Earth in the GeV en-
ergy region, where energy losses during propagation do not play an important role, is
∼10−2, which is a reason for concern if one wants to associate the origin of CR elec-
trons to SNRs as well. One should, however, exercise some caution here, in that the
effective spectrum of CRs injected by a SNR is the integral over time of the particles
escaping the remnant at different times. The problem of escape of CRs from their
sources is of central importance to the origin of CRs and is also one of the most un-
certain aspects of the whole SNR paradigm (see Sect. 6.1 below). The value of Kep as
inferred from multiwavelength studies in the sources reﬂects the instantaneous ratio
of densities of electrons and protons, while the value of Kep as measured at Earth is
the result of the integration over time of the escape ﬂux and the overlap of potentially
different numerous sources. This is not a justiﬁcation of the discrepancy, but rather an
assessment of the complexity that lies behind the simple nature of the SNR paradigm.
Another instance of this complexity is represented by the spectra of accelerated
particles in a SNR (see Sect. 6.2 below). The basic prediction of DSA in its linear
or non-linear version is that the spectra of accelerated particles at sufﬁciently high
energies (above few GeV) should be close to ∼E−2 or harder if the efﬁciency of
acceleration is high enough to drive a strong dynamical reaction on the shock. As
discussed below, this simple expectation is in conﬂict both with measurements of
CR anisotropy at Earth and with measurements of the gamma-ray spectrum from
selected SNRs. Whether this represents a symptom of new physical effects of particle


===== PAGE 44 =====

Page 44 of 73
Astron Astrophys Rev (2013) 21:70
acceleration or a byproduct of the environment in which the acceleration process
takes place remains to be understood.
In the following I will try to address the strong and weak points of the SNR
paradigm for the origin of CRs, stressing, whenever possible, which observational
strategy could help improving our understanding.
6.1 Escape
In an ideal plane inﬁnite shock, the return probability of CRs from upstream of the
shock is unity, namely all CRs return to the shock and are eventually advected down-
stream. If this were the end of the story, CRs would all be conﬁned inside a SNR
until the shock would eventually dissipate away and the particles would be able to
escape into the ISM and become CRs. The adiabatic energy losses suffered by par-
ticles during the SN expansion would imply that the highest energy CRs (say with
energy close to the knee) would lose part of their energy and the requirements in
terms of maximum energy at the source would be even more severe than they already
are. More important, one would not expect any gamma-ray emission in situations in
which a molecular cloud is illuminated by the CR escaping from a nearby SNR, or at
least this phenomenon would appear only when CRs are left free to escape since the
shock is no longer able to conﬁne them inside the expanding shell.
Many physical phenomena intervene in a more realistic shock wave: (1) the shock
slows down due to mass accumulation, more so during the Sedov–Taylor phase. In
this phase, the shock radius changes in time as Rsh ∝t2/5 (if the expansion takes place
in a homogeneous ISM), while the diffusion front of CRs moving with the shock
expands with respect to the shock as ∝t1/2. It seems unavoidable that more particles
will diffuse away from the shock and the probability that they may return to the shock
from upstream is reduced. (2) The shock may be broken, so as to allow for particles’
escape to some extent. In this instance, the spectrum and density of escaping particles
would depend on details of the environment in which the shock expands, making
this scenario rather unappealing but not necessarily less realistic. (3) If particles can
produce their own scattering centers through the collective excitation of streaming
instability, it is reasonable to imagine that at some distance from the shock the particle
density drops, so as to make the scattering frequency too low to warrant their return
to the shock.
A careful description of the numerous problems involved in the description of the
escape of particles from a SNR shock can be found in a recent paper by Drury (2011).
Historically, in the absence of a physical theory of particle escape, this phe-
nomenon has been modeled by introducing a spatial boundary (the same for particles
of any energy) at which particles are left free to escape the system. This condition is
usually implemented by solving the diffusion–convection equation with the bound-
ary condition that f (p,z0) = 0, where z0 is the location of the escape boundary. The
idea behind this boundary condition is that when self-conﬁnement becomes inefﬁ-
cient, the particle density drops as a result of a transition to a sort of ballistic motion.
Clearly, even this description is rather simplistic in that even the escaping particles
move diffusively, but with a larger scattering length, probably closer to the one they
experience while diffusing in the Galaxy. In other words, what is changing is the


===== PAGE 45 =====

P. Blasi: The origin of galactic cosmic rays
Page 45 of 73
value of the diffusion coefﬁcient, which increases from the small, self-generated one
in the shock proximity, to the larger one present in the Galaxy.
The position of the free escape boundary is usually assumed to be located at a
given fraction (of order ∼10 %) of the shock radius. In this case, the solution of the
transport equation can be simply found to be
f (z,p) = f0(p)
exp( uz
D(p)) −exp( uz0
D(p))
1 −exp( uz0
D(p))
,
(100)
in the assumption that the diffusion coefﬁcient D(p) does not depend upon the spa-
tial coordinate x. As usual, I assume that downstream of the shock the particle dis-
tribution is homogeneous, namely ∂f/∂x|2 = 0. The ﬂux of particles escaping the
accelerator at x0 is then
F(z0,p) = −D(p)∂f
∂z

z=z0
= −
u1f0(p)
1 −exp( uz0
D(p)) exp
 uz0
D(p)

.
(101)
The fact that F(z0,p) < 0 simply expresses the fact that the particles are escaping
from the system. As a function of momentum, Eq. (101) vanishes for p →0 and for
p →∞, while it has a peak around the momentum for which D(p∗)/u1 ≃x0, which
can be used as an estimate of the maximum momentum.
In other words, for a given location of the escape boundary, only particles in a
narrow region around the maximum momentum can escape the system, so that the
spectrum of escaping particles as seen from the point of view of an observer out-
side the system appears to be centered around the momentum p∗. On the other hand,
during the Sedov–Taylor phase of a SNR the shock velocity drops, the radius of
the shell increases and the magnetic ﬁeld ampliﬁcation causes the magnetic ﬁeld to
decrease with time. The spectrum of particle escaping the system is then the result
of integration over time of the peaked spectra escaping at any given time. Calculat-
ing this spectrum is a useful exercise and can be done very easily (Caprioli et al.
2010a; Ptuskin et al. 2010). Let us assume that the maximum momentum reached at
the beginning of the Sedov phase, Ts, is pmax,s, and that then it drops with time as
pmax(t) ∝(t/Ts)−α, with α > 0. The energy in the escaping particles of momentum
p is
dϵ = 4πp2dppcNesc(p) = ξesc
1
2ρv3
sh4πR2
shdt,
(102)
where ξesc(t) is the fraction of the income ﬂux 1
2ρv3
sh4πR2
sh that is converted into
escaping ﬂux.
During the Sedov–Taylor phase in a homogeneous medium one has Rsh ∝t2/5
and Vsh ∝t−3/5, therefore from Eq. (102):
Nesc(p) ∝ξesc(t)p−3t−1
dt
dpmax
∝p−4ξesc(t).
(103)
What I obtained is that the spectrum of escaping particles integrated over the Sedov–
Taylor phase of the SNR is p−4 if the fraction ξesc does not depend on time. It is


===== PAGE 46 =====

Page 46 of 73
Astron Astrophys Rev (2013) 21:70
worth stressing that this p−4 has nothing to do with the standard result of the DSA
in the test-particle regime, neither it depends on the detailed evolution in time of the
maximum momentum. It solely depends on having assumed that particles escape the
SNR during the adiabatic (self-similar) phase. Notice also that in realistic calculations
of the escape ξesc usually decreases with time, leading to a spectrum of escaping
particles which is even harder than p−4. The total spectrum of particles injected into
the ISM by an individual SNR is the sum of the escape ﬂux and the ﬂux of particles
escaping the SNR after the shock dissipates and allows for the release of the particles
accelerated throughout the history of the SNR and trapped in the expanding shell.
This simple picture does not change qualitatively once the non-linear effects of
particle acceleration are included: Caprioli et al. (2010a) calculated the spectrum of
CRs injected by a SNR in detail in the context of the NLDSA. These calculations
raise many problems, when compared with observations, as discussed below.
6.2 Spectra
The spectrum of CRs injected by a SNR into the ISM during the few tens thou-
sands years of its evolution is extremely complex to calculate since it requires the
knowledge of the instantaneous spectrum of accelerated particles at any time, of the
temporal evolution of the maximum energy, of the mechanism that leads to particle
escape (see discussion above), and the entire calculation depends on the type of SN
and the environment in which it explodes. The most one can do at the present time
is to consider different scenarios and achieve a quantitative estimate of the amount
of changes in the overall CR spectrum. Several possibilities were investigated by
Caprioli et al. (2010a), but a pretty general conclusion of these calculations is that
the spectrum is typically very close to E−2 at high energies if not harder, mainly as
a result of the dynamical reaction of accelerated particles, and the contribution from
the ﬂux of particles escaping at any given time, which is typically harder than E−2,
as discussed above. A typical spectrum obtained from these calculations is reported
in Fig. 10 (from the work of Caprioli et al. 2010a) for a shock expanding in a uniform
medium with temperature T0 = 105 K and injection parameter ξinj = 3.9. The dashed
curve shows the spectrum of particles escaping through the boundary, located at χRsh
(with χ = 0.15) from the shock, at any time. The dash-dotted line shows the spectrum
of particles that leave the SNR at the end of its evolution. The maximum energy in
the latter component is clearly lower, since higher energy particles escaped at earlier
times through the boundary. The solid line shows the total spectrum contributed by
the SNR after the end of its evolution. The bump-like structure at the highest energies
is due to the hard escape ﬂux dominating there. Notice that the escape ﬂux as calcu-
lated in NLDSA is harder than the naive estimate ∼E−2 derived in Sect. 6.1, and its
concavity reﬂects the temporal evolution of the non-linear dynamical reaction of ac-
celerated particles on the shock. Notice also that in the absence of an escape ﬂux from
the SNR the spectrum of CRs contributed by SNRs (dash-dotted line) would exhibit
a pronounced cutoff at energies much lower than the knee, as a result of adiabatic
energy losses.
The spectrum illustrated in Fig. 10 is troublesome in at least two ways: (1) it is
harder than the spectra observed in gamma rays in several SNRs, as pointed out by


===== PAGE 47 =====

P. Blasi: The origin of galactic cosmic rays
Page 47 of 73
Fig. 10 CR spectrum injected in the ISM by a SNR expanding in a medium with density n0 = 0.1 cm−3,
temperature T0 = 105 K and injection parameter ξinj = 3.9 (from Caprioli et al. 2010a). The dashed line
shows the escape of particles from upstream, the dash-dotted line is the spectrum of particles escaping at
the end of the evolution. The solid line is the sum of the two. The escape boundary is located at 0.15Rsh
Caprioli (2011); (2) if the CR spectrum injected by an individual SNR is that hard,
the diffusion coefﬁcient required in the Galaxy to ﬁt the spectra observed at Earth
is D(E) ∝E0.7 (see also Berezhko and Völk 2007), which is known to result in
exceedingly large CR anisotropy (Ptuskin 2006; Blasi and Amato 2012b).
It is worth noticing that this discrepancy is not a consequence of the non-linear
theory of DSA, in that the predictions of the test-particle theory are also plagued by
the same problem.
It has been argued by Ptuskin et al. (2010), Caprioli et al. (2010a) that one possi-
ble reason for softer spectra might be the presence of fast moving scattering centers
around the shock: as was ﬁrst pointed out by Bell (1978a), the compression factor that
enters the calculation of the spectrum of accelerated particles is the ratio of the up-
stream and downstream velocity of scattering centers. In the case of ordinary Alfvén
waves, vA ≪Vsh and the effect is weak, namely the velocity of the scattering cen-
ters (in the shock frame) is very close to the plasma velocity. On the other hand, in
the case of strong magnetic ﬁeld ampliﬁcation it may be speculated that the speed of
waves may be a sizeable fraction of the shock speed.2 In this case the spectrum of
accelerated particles becomes N(E)dE ∝E−αdE with Caprioli (2012):
α = ˜r + 2
˜r −1,
˜r = u1 ± vW,1
u2 ± vW,2
.
(104)
While it is customary to assume that waves get isotropized downstream (vW,2 = 0),
the compression factor can be either decreased or increases depending on the helic-
ity of waves upstream. This reﬂects in either softer or harder spectra of accelerated
particles.
Another possibility to obtain softer spectra has been discussed by Schure and Bell
(2013): the authors claim that in case of a mainly perpendicular shock geometry, the
2This does not need to be so: for instance in the case of the non-resonant instability discussed by Bell
(2004, 2005), magnetic ﬁeld ampliﬁcation may be effective, and yet the modes are almost purely growing,
namely with very low phase velocity.


===== PAGE 48 =====

Page 48 of 73
Astron Astrophys Rev (2013) 21:70
return probability of particles from downstream can become smaller, thereby leading
to steeper spectra.
It is rather disappointing that both these effects rely on details of the theory, and
one is left to wander if observations may actually allow us to ﬁnd the correct expla-
nation for this rather serious discrepancy between theory and observational evidence.
6.3 Gamma-ray emission from isolated SNRs
The best chance of testing our theories of the origin of CRs in SNRs is in the modeling
of the multifrequency spectrum and morphology of selected SNRs. The purpose of
this section is, however, not that of listing the individual SNRs that have been detected
in gamma rays, but rather to choose a few cases of SNRs that are sufﬁciently isolated
so as to be modeled as individual sources, and use them to illustrate the type of
information that we can gather by comparing observations with theory.
The ﬁrst clear detection of TeV gamma-ray emission from a SNR came from the
SNR RXJ1713.7-3946 (Aharonian et al. 2004, 2006, 2007), later followed by the
detection of the same remnant in the GeV energy range with the Fermi-LAT telescope
(Abdo et al. 2011). Here I will brieﬂy discuss this case because it is instructive of how
the comparison of theoretical predictions with data can drive our understanding of the
acceleration environment.
A discussion of the implications of the TeV data, together with the X-ray data
on spectrum and morphology was presented by Morlino et al. (2009). A hadronic
origin of the gamma-ray emission would easily account for the bright X-ray rims
(requiring a magnetic ﬁeld of ∼160μG), as well as for the gamma-ray spectrum. If
electrons were to share the same temperature as protons, the model would predict
a powerful thermal X-ray emission, which is not detected. Rather than disproving
this possibility, this ﬁnding might be the conﬁrmation of the expectation that at fast
collisionless shocks electrons fail to reach thermal equilibrium with protons. In fact,
the Coulomb collision time scale for this remnant turns out to exceed its age. On the
other hand, it was pointed out by Ellison et al. (2010) that even a slow rate of Coulomb
scattering would be able to heat electrons to a temperature ≳1 keV, so that oxygen
lines would be excited and they would dominate the thermal emission. These lines
are not observed, thereby leading to a severe upper limit on the density of gas in the
shock region, which would result in a too small pion production. Ellison et al. (2010)
concluded that the emission is of leptonic origin. This interpretation appears to be
conﬁrmed by the more recent Fermi-LAT data, which show a very hard gamma-ray
spectrum, incompatible with an origin related to pion production and decay. Clearly
this does not mean that CRs are not efﬁciently accelerated in this remnant. It simply
implies that the gas density is too low for efﬁcient pp scattering.
However, it should be pointed out that models based on ICS of high-energy elec-
trons are not problem free: ﬁrst, as pointed out by Morlino et al. (2009), the density
of IR light necessary to explain the HESS data as the result of ICS is ∼25 times
larger than expected. Second, the ICS interpretation requires a weak magnetic ﬁeld
of order ∼10μG, incompatible with the observed X-ray rims. Finally, recent data
on the distribution of atomic and molecular hydrogen around SNR RXJ1713.7-3946
(Fukui et al. 2012) suggest a rather good spatial correlation between the distribution


===== PAGE 49 =====

P. Blasi: The origin of galactic cosmic rays
Page 49 of 73
of this gas and the TeV gamma-ray emission, which would be easier to explain if
gamma rays were the result of pp scattering. In conclusion, despite the fact that the
shape of the spectrum of gamma rays would suggest a leptonic origin, the case of
SNR RXJ1713.7-3946 will probably turn out to be one of those cases in which the
complexity of the environment around the remnant plays a crucial role in determin-
ing the observed spectrum. Future high resolution gamma-ray observations, possibly
with the Cherenkov telescope array (CTA), will contribute to clarify this situation.
A somewhat clearer case is that of the Tycho SNR, the leftover of a SN type Ia
exploded in a roughly homogeneous ISM, as conﬁrmed by the regular circular shape
of the remnant. Tycho is one of the historical SNRs, as it was observed by Tycho
Brahe in 1572. The multifrequency spectrum of Tycho extends from the radio band
to gamma rays, and a thin X-ray rim is observed all around the remnant (see the right
panel of Fig. 4). It has been argued that the spectrum of gamma rays observed by
Fermi-LAT (Giordano et al. 2012) in the GeV range and by VERITAS (Acciari et al.
2011) in the TeV range can only be compatible with a hadronic origin (Morlino and
Caprioli 2012). The morphology of the X-ray emission, resulting from synchrotron
radiation of electrons in the magnetic ﬁeld at the shock, is consistent with a mag-
netic ﬁeld of ∼300μG, which implies a maximum energy of accelerated protons of
∼500 TeV. A hadronic origin of the gamma-ray emission has also been claimed by
Berezhko et al. (2013), where, however, the steep gamma-ray spectrum measured
from Tycho is attributed to an environmental effect: the gamma ray ﬂux is assumed
to be made of two components: one due to gamma ray production in a roughly ho-
mogeneous medium and another due to gamma ray production in denser, compact
clumps where the maximum energy of CRs is lower. In the calculations of Morlino
and Caprioli (2012) the steep spectrum is instead explained as a result of NLDSA in
the presence of waves moving with the Alfvén velocity calculated in the ampliﬁed
magnetic ﬁeld. In the latter case the shape of the spectrum is related, though in a
model-dependent way, to the strength of the ampliﬁed magnetic ﬁeld, which is the
same quantity relevant to determine the X-ray morphology. In the former model the
steep spectrum might not be found in another SNR in the same conditions, in the
absence of the small-scale density perturbations assumed by the authors.
The multifrequency spectrum of Tycho (left) and the X-ray brightness of its rims
(right) are shown in Fig. 11 (from Morlino and Caprioli 2012). The dash-dotted line in
the left panel shows the thermal emission from the downstream gas (here the electron
temperature is assumed to be related to the proton temperature as Te = (me/mp)Tp
immediately behind the shock, and increases with time solely due to Coulomb scat-
tering, which couples electrons with the warmer protons), the short-dashed line shows
the ICS contribution to the gamma-ray ﬂux, while the dashed line refers to gamma
rays from pion decays. The solid lines show the total ﬂux. The ﬁgure shows rather
impressively how the magnetic ﬁeld necessary to describe the radio and X-ray radi-
ation as synchrotron emission also describes the thickness of the X-ray rims (right
panel) and pushes the maximum energy of accelerated particles to ∼500 TeV (in the
assumption of Bohm diffusion).
The case of Tycho is instructive as an illustration of the level of credibility of cal-
culations based on the theory of NLDSA: the different techniques agree fairly well
(see Caprioli et al. 2010b for a discussion of this point) as long as only the dynamical


===== PAGE 50 =====

Page 50 of 73
Astron Astrophys Rev (2013) 21:70
Fig. 11 Left Panel: Spatially integrated spectral energy distribution of Tycho. The curves show syn-
chrotron emission, thermal electron bremsstrahlung and pion decay as calculated by Morlino and Caprioli
(2012). Gamma-ray data from Fermi-LAT (Giordano et al. 2012) and VERITAS (Acciari et al. 2011) are
shown. Right Panel: Projected X-ray brightness at 1 keV. Data points are from Cassam-Chenaï et al. 2007.
The solid line shows the result of the calculations by Morlino and Caprioli (2012) after convolution with
the Chandra point spread function
reaction of accelerated particles on the shock is included. When magnetic effects are
taken into account, the situation becomes more complex: in the calculations based
on the semi-analytical description of Amato and Blasi (2006) the ﬁeld is estimated
from the growth rate and the dynamical reaction of the magnetic ﬁeld on the shock is
taken into account (Caprioli et al. 2008, 2009b). Similar assumptions are adopted by
Vladimirov et al. (2008), although the technique is profoundly different. Similar con-
siderations hold for Ptuskin et al. (2010). On the other hand, Berezhko et al. (2013)
take the magnetic ﬁeld as a parameter of the problem, chosen to ﬁt the observations,
and its dynamical reaction is not included in the calculations. The magnetic backreac-
tion, as discussed by Caprioli et al. (2008, 2009b) comes into play when the magnetic
pressure exceeds the thermal pressure upstream, and leads to a reduction of the com-
pression factor at the subshock, namely less concave spectra. Even softer spectra are
obtained if one introduces a recipe for the velocity of the scattering centers (Ptuskin
et al. 2010; Caprioli et al. 2010a; Morlino and Caprioli 2012). This, yet speculative,
effect is not included in any of the other approaches.
Even more pronounced differences arise when environmental effects are included.
The case of Tycho is again useful in this respect: the predictions of the standard
NLDSA theory would not be able to explain the observed gamma-ray spectrum from
this SNR. But assuming the existence of ad hoc density ﬂuctuations, may change
the volume integrated gamma-ray spectrum as to make it similar to the observed one
(Berezhko et al. 2013). Space resolved gamma-ray observations would help clarify
the role of these environmental effects in forging the gamma-ray spectrum of a SNR.
6.4 SNRs near molecular clouds
There is no lack of evidence of CR proton acceleration in SNRs close to molecular
clouds (MC), which act as a target for hadronic interactions resulting in pion produc-
tion. Recently the AGILE (Giuliani et al. 2010, 2011) and Fermi-LAT (Abdo et al.
2009, 2010a, 2010b, 2010c; Ackermann et al. 2013) collaborations claimed the de-
tection of the much sought-after pion bump in the gamma-ray spectrum. This spectral


===== PAGE 51 =====

P. Blasi: The origin of galactic cosmic rays
Page 51 of 73
Fig. 12 Pion bump in the gamma-ray emission of SNRs IC 443 and W44 as measured by Fermi-LAT and
reported by Ackermann et al. (2013)
feature conﬁrms that the bulk of the gamma-ray emission in these objects is due to
pp →π0 →2γ .
Figure 12 (from Ackermann et al. 2013) shows the gamma-ray spectra of SNRs
IC443 (left panel) and W44 (right panel), where the pion bump is well visible. The
steep gamma-ray spectrum at high energies suggests that the acceleration process is
no longer very active, as one may qualitatively have expected for old SNRs.
SNRs close to molecular clouds are very interesting astrophysical objects, not so
much in terms of investigating CR acceleration (as these are old objects in which
one would not expect acceleration to very high energies), but rather as laboratories to
investigate CR propagation around sources and escape from sources. In this respect,
it is useful to separate the SNR-MC associations in two types: (1) the ones in which
the shock is directly propagating inside the cloud, and (2) the ones in which the MC
is illuminated by CRs propagating out of a nearby SNR, which is, however, at some
distance from the cloud.
In the ﬁrst instance, several new effects intervene: for a density of molecular gas
n = 103 cm−3, the interaction length between molecules, assuming a geometric cross
section of σ ∼10−14 cm2, becomes λ ∼1/nσ ∼1011 cm. Moreover, the typical
fraction of ionized gas in a molecular gas is so small that collisionless processes
of formation of a shock wave may be less important than the ones associated with
molecular collisions. The SNR shock impacting a molecular gas might become col-
lisional, thereby leading to heating of the molecular gas on a scale ∼λ downstream.
This picture appears to be supported by the presence of maser emission from behind
such shocks (Hewitt et al. 2009), which prove the presence of heated molecular gas.
The possibility that such shocks may accelerate particles is all but demonstrated. In
fact the gamma-ray emission from a MC in these conditions might be the result of
the streaming of particles accelerated at previous times at the collisionless SNR shock
and liberated once the shock impacts the MC.
The second scenario has received more attention (see for instance Gabici et al.
2007, 2009, Rodriguez Marrero et al. 2008). The propagation of escaping CRs from
a SNR shock to a MC in its vicinity is a rather complex phenomenon to describe
and model: the spectrum of CRs reaching the MC is in general time dependent, in
that it is affected by both the time dependence of the escape ﬂux (see discussion in
Sect. 6.1) and by the ﬁnite time that CRs have to diffuse out to the distance of the


===== PAGE 52 =====

Page 52 of 73
Astron Astrophys Rev (2013) 21:70
MC, RMC. Several authors have argued that a low energy cutoff can be expected in
the CR spectrum, at the energy for which [D(E)τSNR]1/2 ≃RMC. This reﬂects the
fact that higher energy particles diffuse faster, thereby reaching the MC when lower
energy particles are still lagging behind. It is important to notice that a low energy
cutoff in the spectrum of CRs reaching the MC at a given time does not reﬂect in a
cutoff in the gamma-ray spectrum: the cross section for pion production from a proton
of given energy scales approximately as 1/Eπ, so that low energy gamma rays are
expected to have a spectrum approximately ∝E−1
γ , a signature of a low energy cut
in the CR spectrum at the MC location. Possible indications of this phenomenon
might have been already detected in the SNR W28 (Giuliani et al. 2010), where two
clouds at different distances from the SNR appear to be illuminated in a different
way (different ﬂux of CRs) and to be characterized by a low energy spectral break
that starts at higher energies for the most distant MC, as one would expect if the break
is related to CR propagation.
Two phenomena add to the complexity of the picture presented above: (1) for
isotropic diffusion, the density of CRs from the SNR dominates upon the Galactic CR
spectrum for distances of a few tens of parsecs (see discussion in Blasi and Amato
2012a). This may imply that the diffusion properties of CRs inside such distance
are self-produced by the diffusing CRs, therefore possibly very different from the
average conditions inside the Galaxy at large. In case of dominant parallel diffusion,
this effect becomes even more important. (2) If there is a dominant orientation of the
background Galactic magnetic ﬁeld where the SNR and the MC are located, one can
expect anisotropic diffusive effects to play a prominent role. Below I brieﬂy discuss
these issues, which might represent major sources of interesting discoveries in the
near future.
As I pointed out several times throughout this review, CRs play a crucial role in
determining the diffusion properties of the medium in which they propagate. This is
equally true at SNR shocks, in the Galaxy while CRs propagate, and near sources
due to the CR gradient that is established there. A self-consistent solution of the
propagation of CRs near their sources has recently been presented by Malkov et al.
(2013), where effects of diffusion parallel and perpendicular to the local magnetic
ﬁeld have also been discussed.
The expected pattern of diffusion mainly parallel to the background local magnetic
ﬁeld reﬂects in a spatial distribution of CRs which is elongated in the direction of the
ﬁeld (Nava and Gabici 2013; Giacinti et al. 2013) at least for a time smaller than the
diffusion time over a scale of the order of the coherence scale Lc ∼50–100 pc of the
magnetic ﬁeld. When CRs diffuse farther than Lc they start feeling the random walk
of magnetic ﬁeld lines and their distribution spreads in three spatial dimensions. If
a nearby MC is located along the direction of the magnetic ﬁeld it gets eventually
illuminated by CRs escaping the SNR. If on the other hand the MC is not connected
to the SNR by a ﬂux tube, it is unlikely to be illuminated by CRs (because perpen-
dicular diffusion is suppressed on these scales), and virtually no gamma-ray emission
is expected. This picture is strikingly more complex and richer of information than
the simple picture of CRs escaping a SNR isotropically that is usually adopted in
studying MCs.


===== PAGE 53 =====

P. Blasi: The origin of galactic cosmic rays
Page 53 of 73
7 Hα line as a cosmic-ray calorimeter in SNRs
Hα optical emission from Balmer-dominated SNR shocks is a powerful indicator of
the conditions around the shock (Chevalier and Raymond 1978; Chevalier et al. 1980)
including the presence of accelerated particles (see Heng 2010 for a review). The Hα
line is produced when neutral hydrogen is present in the shock region, and it gets
excited by collisions with thermal ions and electrons to the level n = 3 and decays to
n = 2. In the following I describe the basic physics aspects of this phenomenon and
how it can be used to gather information on the CR energy content at the shock.
A collisionless shock propagating in a partially ionized background goes through
several interesting new phenomena: ﬁrst, neutral atoms cross the shock surface with-
out suffering any direct heating, due to the collisionless nature of the shock (all inter-
actions are of electromagnetic nature, therefore the energy and momentum of neutral
hydrogen cannot be changed). However, a neutral atom has a ﬁnite probability of
undergoing either ionization or a charge exchange reaction, whenever there is a net
velocity difference between ions and atoms. Behind the shock, ions are slowed down
(their bulk motion velocity drops down) and heated up, while neutral atoms remain
colder and faster. The reactions of charge exchange lead to formation of a popula-
tion of hot atoms (a hot ion downstream catches an electron from a fast neutral),
which also have a ﬁnite probability of getting excited. The Balmer line emission
from this population corresponds to a Doppler broadened line with a width that re-
ﬂects the temperature of the hot ions downstream. Measurements of the width of
the broad Balmer line have often been used to estimate the temperature of protons
behind the shock, and in fact it is basically the only method to do so, since at colli-
sionless shocks electrons (which are responsible for the continuum X-ray emission)
have typically a lower temperature than protons. Equilibration between the two pop-
ulations of particles (electrons and protons) may eventually occur either collision-
ally (through Coulomb scattering) or through collective processes. The broad Balmer
line is produced by hydrogen atoms that suffer at least one charge exchange reaction
downstream of the shock. The atoms that enter downstream and are excited before
suffering a charge exchange also contribute to the Hα line, but the width of the line
reﬂects the gas temperature upstream, and is therefore narrow (for a temperature of
104 K, the width is 21 km/s). In summary, the propagation of a collisionless shock
through a partially ionized medium leads to Hα emission, consisting of a broad and
a narrow line (see the recent review by Ghavamian et al. 2013).
When CRs are efﬁciently accelerated, two phenomena occur, as discussed in
Sect. 4: (1) the temperature of the gas downstream of the shock is lower than in
the absence of accelerated particles. (2) A precursor is formed upstream, as a result
of the pressure exerted by accelerated particles.
Both these phenomena have an impact on the shape and brightness of the Balmer
line emission. The lower temperature of the downstream gas leads to a narrower
broad Balmer line, whose width bears now information on the pressure of accelerated
particles, through the conservation equations at the shock.
The CR-induced precursor slows down the upstream ionized gas with respect to
the hydrogen atoms, which again do not feel the precursor but through charge ex-
change. If ions are heated in the precursor (not only adiabatically, but also because of


===== PAGE 54 =====

Page 54 of 73
Astron Astrophys Rev (2013) 21:70
turbulent heating) the charge exchange reactions transfer some of the internal energy
to neutral hydrogen, thereby heating it. This phenomenon results in a broadening of
the narrow Balmer line.
A narrower broad Balmer line and a broader narrow Balmer line are both signa-
tures of CR acceleration at SNR shocks (Heng 2010). The theory of CR acceleration
at collisionless SNR shocks in the presence of neutral hydrogen has only recently
been formulated (Blasi et al. 2012; Morlino et al. 2012, 2013c) and has led to the
prediction of several new interesting phenomena, discussed below.
7.1 Acceleration of test particles at shocks in partially ionized media
The presence of neutrals in the shock region changes the structure of the shock even in
the absence of appreciable amounts of accelerated particles, due to the phenomenon
of neutral return ﬂux (Blasi et al. 2012). A neutral atom that crosses the shock and
suffers a charge exchange reaction downstream gives rise to a new neutral atom mov-
ing with high bulk velocity. There is a sizeable probability (dependent upon the shock
velocity) that the resulting atom moves towards the shock and crosses it towards up-
stream. A new reaction of either charge exchange or ionization upstream leads the
atom to deposit energy and momentum in the upstream plasma, within a distance of
the order of its collision length. On the same distance scale, the upstream plasma
get heated up and slows down slightly, thereby resulting in a reduction of the plasma
Mach number immediately upstream of the shock (within a few pathlengths of charge
exchange and/or ionization). This implies that the shock strength drops, namely its
compression factor becomes less than 4 (even for strong shocks).
This neutral return ﬂux (Blasi et al. 2012) plays a very important role in the shock
dynamics for velocity Vsh ≲3000 km/s. For faster shocks, the cross section for charge
exchange drops rather rapidly and ionization is more likely to occur downstream. This
reduces the neutral return ﬂux and the shock modiﬁcation it produces.
The consequences of the neutral return ﬂux both on the process of particle accel-
eration and on the shape of the Balmer line are very serious: some hydrogen atoms
undergo charge exchange immediately upstream of the shock, with ions that have
been heated by the neutral return ﬂux. These atoms give rise to a Balmer line emis-
sion corresponding to the temperature of the ions immediately upstream of the shock.
As demonstrated by Morlino et al. (2012) this contribution consists of an intermediate
Balmer line, with a typical width of ∼100–300 km/s. Some tentative evidence of this
intermediate line might have already been found in existing data (e.g. see Ghavamian
et al. 2000).
The most striking consequence of the neutral return ﬂux is, however, the steepen-
ing of the spectrum of test particles accelerated at the shock, ﬁrst discussed by Blasi
et al. (2012). The effect is caused by the reduction of the compression factor of the
shock, which reﬂects on the fact that the slope of the spectrum of accelerated particles
gets softer. This effect is, however, limited to particles that diffuse upstream of the
shock out to a distance of order a few collision lengths of charge exchange/ionization
upstream. It follows that the steepening of the spectrum is limited to particle energies
low enough as to make their diffusion length shorter than the pathlength for charge
exchange and ionization. In Fig. 13 (from Blasi et al. 2012) I show the spectral slope


===== PAGE 55 =====

P. Blasi: The origin of galactic cosmic rays
Page 55 of 73
Fig. 13 Slope of the differential
spectrum of test particles
accelerated at a shock
propagating in a partially
ionized medium, with density
0.1 cm−3, magnetic ﬁeld 10μG
and ionized fraction of 50 %, as
a function of the shock velocity.
The lines show the slope for
particles at different energies, as
indicated. The ﬁgure is taken
from the paper by Blasi et al.
(2012)
as a function of shock velocity for particles with energy 1, 10, 100, 1000 GeV, as
labeled (background gas density, magnetic ﬁeld and ionization fraction are as indi-
cated). One can see that the standard slope ∼2 is recovered only for shock velocities
>3000 km/s. For shocks with velocity ∼1000 km/s the effect may make the spectra
extremely steep, to the point that the energy content may be dominated by the injec-
tion energy, rather than, as it usually is, by the particle mass. This situation, for all
practical purposes, corresponds to not having particle acceleration but rather a strong
modiﬁcation of the distribution of thermal particles. For milder neutral induced shock
modiﬁcations, the effect is that of making the spectra of accelerated particles softer.
It is possible that this effect may play a role in reconciling the predicted CR spectra
with those inferred from gamma-ray observations (see Caprioli 2011 and Sect. 6.2 for
a discussion of this problem), although the effect is expected to be prominent only
for shocks slower than ∼3000 km s−1.
7.2 NLDSA in partially ionized media
The theory of NLDSA in the presence of partially ionized media was fully devel-
oped by Morlino et al. (2013c), using the kinetic formalism introduced by Blasi et al.
(2012) to account for the fact that neutral atoms do not behave as a ﬂuid, and their
distribution in phase space can hardly be approximated as being a maxwellian. The
theory describes the physics of particle acceleration, taking into account the shock
modiﬁcation induced by accelerated particles as well as neutrals, and magnetic ﬁeld
ampliﬁcation. The theory is based on a mixed technique in which neutrals are treated
through a Boltzmann equation while ions are treated as a ﬂuid. The collision term in
the Boltzmann equation is represented by the interaction rates of hydrogen atoms due
to charge exchange with ions and ionization, at any given location. The Boltzmann
equation for neutrals, the ﬂuid equations for ions and the non-linear partial differ-
ential equation for accelerated particles are coupled together and solved by using an
iterative method. The calculation returns the spectrum of accelerated particles at any
location, all thermodynamical quantities of the background plasma (density, temper-
ature, pressure) at any location, the magnetic ﬁeld distribution, and the distribution
function of neutral hydrogen in phase space at any location from far upstream to far
downstream.
These quantities can then be used to infer the Balmer line emission from the shock
region, taking into account the excitation probabilities to the different atomic levels


===== PAGE 56 =====

Page 56 of 73
Astron Astrophys Rev (2013) 21:70
Fig. 14 Left Panel: Shape of the Balmer line emission for a shock moving with velocity Vsh = 4000 km/s
in a medium with density 0.1 cm−3, as calculated by Morlino et al. (2013c). The thick (black) solid
line shows the result in the absence of particle acceleration. The other lines show the broadening of the
narrow component and the narrowing of the broad component when CR are accelerated with an injection
parameter ξinj = 3.5 and different levels of turbulent heating (ηTH) as indicated. Right Panel: Zoom-in of
the left panel on the region of the narrow Balmer line, in order to emphasize the broadening of the narrow
component in the case of efﬁcient particle acceleration
in hydrogen. An instance of such calculation is shown in Fig. 14, where I show the
shape of the Balmer line for a shock moving with velocity Vsh = 4000 km/s in a
medium with density 0.1 cm−3 with a maximum momentum of accelerated particles
pmax = 50 TeV/c. The left panel shows the whole structure of the line, including the
narrow and broad components, while the right panel shows a zoom-in on the nar-
row Balmer line region (gray shadowed region in the left panel). The black line is
the Balmer line emission in the absence of accelerated particles. Allowing for par-
ticle acceleration to occur leads to a narrower broad Balmer line (left panel) and to
a broadening of the narrow component (right panel). The latter is rather sensitive,
however, to the level of turbulent heating in the upstream plasma, namely the amount
of energy that is damped by waves into thermal energy of the background plasma.
In fact turbulent heating is also responsible for a more evident intermediate Balmer
line (better visible in the left panel) with a width of few 100 km/s. It is worth recall-
ing that observations of the Balmer line width are usually aimed at either the narrow
or the broad component, but usually not both, because of the very different velocity
resolution necessary for measuring the two lines. Therefore the intermediate line is
usually absorbed in either the broad or the narrow component, depending on which
component is being measured. This implies that an assessment of the observability of
the intermediate Balmer component requires a proper convolution of the predictions
with the velocity resolution of the instrument.
At the time of this review, an anomalous shape of the broad Balmer line has been
reliably measured in a couple of SNRs, namely SNR 0509-67.5 (Helder et al. 2010,
2011) and SNR RCW86 (Helder et al. 2009). As I discuss below, the main problem
in making a case for CR acceleration is the uncertainty in the knowledge of the shock
velocity and the degree of electron-ion equilibration downstream of the shock. The
ratio of the electron and proton temperatures downstream is indicated here as βdown =
Te/Tp. The other parameters of the problem have a lesser impact on the inferred value
of the CR acceleration efﬁciency.


===== PAGE 57 =====

P. Blasi: The origin of galactic cosmic rays
Page 57 of 73
Fig. 15 FWHM of the broad Balmer line as a function of the CR acceleration efﬁciency for the SNR
0509-67.5, as calculated by Morlino et al. (2013b), assuming a shock velocity Vsh = 4000 km/s (left
panel) and Vsh = 5000 km/s (right panel) and a neutral fraction hN = 10 %. The lines (from top to bottom)
refer to different levels of electron-ion equilibration, βdown = 0.01,0.1,0.5,1, The shadowed region is the
FWHM with 1σ error bar, as measured by Helder et al. (2010)
The SNR 0509-67.5 is located in the Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC), therefore its
distance is very well known, 50±1 kpc. Helder et al. (2010, 2011) carried out a mea-
surement of the broad component of the Hα line emission in two different regions of
the blast wave of SNR 0509-67.5, located in the southwest (SW) and northeast (NE)
rim, obtaining a FWHM of 2680 ± 70 km/s and 3900 ± 800 km/s, respectively. The
shock velocity was estimated to be Vsh = 6000 ± 300 km/s when averaged over the
entire remnant, and 6600 ± 400 km/s in the NE part, while a value of 5000 km/s was
used by Helder et al. (2010, 2011) for the SW rim. The width of the broad Balmer
line was claimed by the authors to be suggestive of efﬁcient CR acceleration. In order
to infer the CR acceleration efﬁciency the authors made use of the calculations by van
Adelsberg et al. (2008), which, as discussed by Morlino et al. (2013a), adopt some as-
sumptions on the distribution function of neutral hydrogen that may lead to a serious
overestimate of the acceleration efﬁciency for fast shocks. Moreover, a closer look at
the morphology of this SNR, reveals that the SW rim might be moving with a lower
velocity than assumed by Helder et al. (2010, 2011), possibly as low as ∼4000 km/s.
Both these facts have the effect of implying a lower CR acceleration efﬁciency, as
found by Morlino et al. (2013b).
In Fig. 15 (from Morlino et al. 2013b) I show the FWHM of the broad Balmer
line in the SW rim of SNR 0509-67.5 as a function of the acceleration efﬁciency,
for shock velocity Vsh = 4000 km/s (on the left) and Vsh = 5000 km/s (on the
right) and a neutral fraction hN = 10 %. The shaded area represents the FWHM
as measured by Helder et al. (2010, 2011), with a 1σ error bar. The curves refer
to βdown = 0.01, 0.1, 0.5, 1 from top to bottom. For low shock speed and for full
electron-ion equilibration (βdown = 1) the measured FWHM is still compatible with
no CR acceleration. On the other hand, for such fast shocks, it is found that βdown ≪1
(Ghavamian et al. 2007, 2013), in which case one can see that acceleration efﬁcien-
cies of ∼10–20 % can be inferred from the measured FWHM.
The case of RCW86 is more complex: the results of a measurement of the FWHM
of the broad Balmer line were reported by Helder et al. (2009), where the authors
claimed a FWHM of 1100 ± 63 km/s with a shock velocity of 6000 ± 2800 km/s and
deduced a very large acceleration efﬁciency (∼80 %). In a more recent paper by the


===== PAGE 58 =====

Page 58 of 73
Astron Astrophys Rev (2013) 21:70
same authors (Helder et al. 2013), the results of Helder et al. (2009) were basically
retracted: several regions of the SNR RCW86 were studied in detail and lower values
of the shock velocity were inferred. Only marginal evidence for particle acceleration
was found in selected regions. The morphology of this remnant is very complex and
it is not easy to deﬁne global properties. Different parts of the SNR shock need to
be studied separately. In addition, the uncertainty in the distance to SNR RCW86 is
such as to make the estimate of the acceleration efﬁciency even more difﬁcult.
Anomalous widths of narrow Balmer lines have been also observed in several
SNRs (see, e.g. Sollerman et al. 2003). The width of such lines is in the 30–50 km/s
range, implying a pre-shock temperature around 25000–50000 K. If this were the
ISM equilibrium temperature there would be no atomic hydrogen, implying that the
pre-shock hydrogen is heated by some form of shock precursor in a region that is
sufﬁciently thin so as to make collisional ionization equilibrium before the shock
unfeasible. The CR precursor is the most plausible candidate to explain such a broad-
ening of the narrow line.
Most important would be to have measurements of the width of the narrow and
broad components (and possibly intermediate component) of the Balmer line at the
same location in order to allow for a proper estimate of the CR acceleration efﬁciency.
Co-spatial observation of the thermal X-ray emission would also provide important
constraints on the electron temperature. So far, this information is not yet available
with the necessary accuracy in any of the astrophysical objects of relevance.
Recent observations of the Balmer emission from the NW rim of SN1006 (Nikoli´c
et al. 2013) have revealed a rather complex structure of the collisionless shock. That
part of the remnant acts as a bright Balmer source, but does not appear to be a site
of effective particle acceleration, as one can deduce from the absence of non-thermal
X-ray emission from that region. This reﬂects in a width of the broad Balmer line that
appears to be compatible with the estimated shock velocity in the same region, with
no need for the presence of accelerated particles. The observations of Nikoli´c et al.
(2013) provide, however, a rather impressive demonstration of the huge potential of
Balmer line observations, not only to infer the CR acceleration efﬁciency, but also as
a tool to measure the properties of collisionless shocks.
8 Conclusions
The problem of the origin of cosmic rays is a complex one: what we observe at the
Earth results from the convolution of acceleration inside sources, escape from the
sources and propagation in the Galaxy (or in the Universe, for extragalactic cosmic
rays). Each one of these pieces consists of a complex and often non-linear combina-
tion of pieces of physics. This intricate chain of physical processes and the fact that
wildly different spatial and temporal scales are involved represent the very reasons
why we are still discussing of the problem of the origin of cosmic rays, one century
after the discovery of their existence.
Here I summarized the main aspects of the physics of acceleration of CRs in SNRs,
emphasizing the progress made in the last decade or so, as well as the numerous loose
ends deriving from the comparison between theoretical predictions and observational
ﬁndings.


===== PAGE 59 =====

P. Blasi: The origin of galactic cosmic rays
Page 59 of 73
At the time of writing this review, there is enough circumstantial evidence sug-
gesting that SNRs accelerate the bulk of Galactic CRs, so as to introduce the concept
of SNR paradigm. This evidence is mainly based on the following pieces of obser-
vation: (1) gamma-ray measurements, both from the ground and from space, prove
that SNRs accelerate particles up to at least 50–500 TeV (Aharonian 2013; Brandt
et al. 2013a, 2013b; Holder 2012). In some of these cases (for instance in Tycho) one
can make the case that the observed gamma-ray emission is most likely due to the
decay of neutral pions, thereby supporting the hypothesis that CR protons are being
accelerated. (2) X-ray spectrum and morphology strongly suggest that magnetic ﬁeld
ampliﬁcation is taking place at SNR shocks (Völk et al. 2005), in virtually all young
SNRs that we are aware of, with ﬁeld strength of order few 100μG (Vink 2012).
This phenomenon is most easily explained if accelerated particles induce the ampliﬁ-
cation of the ﬁelds through the excitation of plasma instabilities. In this way, particles
scatter on waves that are produced by the same particles that are being accelerated
(Schure et al. 2012). (3) In selected SNRs there is evidence for anomalous width of
the Balmer lines, which can be interpreted as the result of efﬁcient CR acceleration
at SNR shocks (Heng 2010).
Despite the conﬁdence that SNRs may act as the main sources of the bulk of Galac-
tic CRs, at present there is not yet any evidence of an individual SNR accelerating
CRs up to the knee, although, as discussed by Caprioli (2011, 2012), this may not be
surprising, because of the relatively short duration of the phase during which accel-
eration to the highest energies is expected to take place. More disturbing is the lack
of a complete understanding of the physical mechanisms responsible for magnetic
ﬁeld ampliﬁcation. I discussed here several ideas on how magnetic ﬁeld ampliﬁca-
tion may occur and how this phenomenon feeds back on the distribution function of
accelerated particles. While it appears that there are several ways of describing the
large magnetic ﬁelds inferred from X-ray morphology, it seems harder to produce
these ﬁelds on spatial scales relevant for particle scatterings at the highest energies.
In other words, the issue of the highest energy achievable at SNR shocks remains
open. Promising results in this direction are, however, recently arising from numeri-
cal investigations of the development of a ﬁlamentation instability (Reville and Bell
2012; Caprioli and Spitkovsky 2013), which might represent a breakthrough in our
understanding of the connection between particle escape from the accelerator and
generation of turbulence on the necessary spatial scales.
Magnetic ﬁeld ampliﬁcation and CR dynamical reaction on the accelerator rep-
resent the two main ingredients of the non-linear theory of particle acceleration at
SNR shocks. The main predictions of the theory are that (1) the spectra of acceler-
ated particles are no longer power laws, being concave in shape and possibly harder
than predicted by the test-particle theory of DSA, and (2) that the temperature of the
plasma behind the shock is expected to be lower at a SNR shock that is accelerating
CRs effectively than it would be in the absence of particle acceleration.
The spectra of accelerated particles predicted by NLDSA, as well as the test-
particle spectra, are at odds with the current observations of gamma-ray emission
from SNRs and with the anisotropy observed at Earth. The physical reason for this
discrepancy is that since the spectra of particles accelerated at SNRs are so hard,
the required diffusion coefﬁcient in the Galaxy is a rather steep function of energy,


===== PAGE 60 =====

Page 60 of 73
Astron Astrophys Rev (2013) 21:70
D(E) ∝E0.7 at relativistic energies (Berezhko and Völk 2007). Such a dependence
is known to be incompatible with the measured anisotropy at energies E ≳10 TeV
(Ptuskin 2006; Blasi and Amato 2012b). The hard spectra inside the sources also ap-
pear to be incompatible with the gamma-ray spectra from a sample of SNRs (Caprioli
2011). It is worth recalling that the spectra of particles escaping a SNR are not as con-
cave as the spectra of particles accelerated at any given time at the shock (Caprioli
et al. 2010a), but this effect is not sufﬁcient to solve the anisotropy problem. Several
authors (Ptuskin et al. 2010; Caprioli et al. 2010a; Caprioli 2012) suggested that ap-
preciably steeper spectra may be obtained by assuming fast moving scattering centers
in the upstream ﬂuid, but this effect appears to be dependent on rather poorly known
characteristics of the waves responsible for the scattering.
A deeper look into the physics of particle acceleration in SNRs will be possi-
ble with the upcoming new generation of gamma-ray telescopes, most notably the
Cherenkov Telescope Array (CTA) (Acharya et al. 2013). The increased sensitivity
of CTA is likely to lead to the discovery of a considerable number of other SNRs
that are in the process of accelerating CRs in our Galaxy. The high angular resolu-
tion will allow us to measure the spectrum of gamma-ray emission from different
regions of the same SNR so as to achieve a better description of the dependence of
the acceleration process upon the environment in which acceleration takes place.
Interestingly, it has recently been realized that the presence of accelerated parti-
cles in the shock region of a SNR exploding in a partially ionized medium leads to
considerable modiﬁcation of the acceleration process (Morlino et al. 2013c), as well
as to modiﬁcation of the shape of the Balmer line emission from hydrogen atoms
(Morlino et al. 2012, 2013c). Measurements of the Balmer emission from SNRs that
show evidence of particle acceleration is a unique tool to measure the CR acceleration
efﬁciency. The very high angular resolution of optical observations may, in principle
make possible to achieve a detailed investigation of the CR acceleration process in
SNRs.
The general picture that arises from the SNR paradigm inspires some conﬁdence
that we may unfold the mechanism responsible for the acceleration of CR protons up
to a few PeV, and of nuclei of charge Z to an energy Z times larger. For iron nuclei
this implies that the maximum energy should be ∼1017 eV. This energy should also
ﬂag the end of the Galactic CR spectrum. The fact that this energy is much lower
than the ankle, where traditionally the transition from Galactic to extragalactic CR
has been placed, has stimulated a considerable interest in the development of models
that may be able to describe at once the CR spectrum in the transition region and the
chemical composition observed by different experiments in the relevant energy region
(see Aloisio et al. 2012 for a review). At the time of writing of this review, it is unclear
whether the low maximum energy inferred based on the SNR paradigm are compat-
ible with the observed chemical composition and spectra. Recent data collected with
the KASCADE-Grande experiment (Apel et al. 2013) and ICETOP (Abbasi et al.
2013; Aartsen et al. 2013) suggest that some additional CR component is needed in
the energy region between 1017 eV and 1019 eV. The required chemical composition
by these data at 1018 eV is a roughly equal mix of light and heavy nuclei, which does
not appear to be in obvious agreement with the chemical composition observed by
the Pierre Auger Observatory (Abraham et al. 2010), HiRes (Sokolsky and Thomson


===== PAGE 61 =====

P. Blasi: The origin of galactic cosmic rays
Page 61 of 73
2007) and Telescope Array (Sokolsky 2013), which ﬁnd a chemical composition at
1018 eV that is dominated by a light chemical component. The understanding of the
transition region through increasingly more accurate measurements of chemical com-
position is a crucial step towards ﬁguring out the origin of ultra high-energy cosmic
rays, which still represents a big unsolved problem.
Acknowledgements
The author is grateful to his friends and colleagues in the Arcetri High Energy
Astrophysics Group, R. Aloisio, E. Amato, R. Bandiera, N. Bucciantini, G. Morlino, O. Petruk for daily
discussions on everything, as well as to D. Caprioli and P.D. Serpico for continuous collaboration and to
Tom Gaisser for providing Fig. 1. The author is also grateful to Tony Bell for a long discussion at the
Aspen Center for Physics. This work was completed while at the Aspen Center for Physics, supported in
part by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. PHYS-1066293, by the Simons Foundation and
by PRIN INAF 2010.
References
Abbasi R, Abdou Y, Ackermann M, Adams J, Aguilar JA, Ahlers M, Altmann D, Andeen K, Auffenberg
J, Bai X, Baker M, Barwick SW, Baum V, Bay R, Beattie K, Beatty JJ, Bechet S, Becker JK, Becker
KH, Bell M, Benabderrahmane ML, Benzvi S, Berdermann J, Berghaus P, Berley D, Bernardini E,
Bertrand D, Besson DZ, Bindig D, Bissok M, Blaufuss E, Blumenthal J, Boersma DJ, Bohm C, Bose
D, Böser S, Botner O, Brayeur L, Brown AM, Bruijn R, Brunner J, Buitink S, Caballero-Mora KS,
Carson M, Casey J, Casier M, Chirkin D, Christy B, Clevermann F, Cohen S, Cowen DF, Silva AHC,
Danninger M, Daughhetee J, Davis JC, Clercq CD, Descamps F, Desiati P, de Vries-Uiterweerd G,
Deyoung T, Díaz-Vélez JC, Dreyer J, Dumm JP, Dunkman M, Eagan R, Eisch J, Ellsworth RW,
Engdegård O, Euler S, Evenson PA, Fadiran O, Fazely AR, Fedynitch A, Feintzeig J, Feusels T,
Filimonov K, Finley C, Fischer-Wasels T, Flis S, Franckowiak A, Franke R, Frantzen K, Fuchs T,
Gaisser TK, Gallagher J, Gerhardt L, Gladstone L, Glüsenkamp T, Goldschmidt A, Goodman JA,
Góra D, Grant D, Groß A, Grullon S, Gurtner M, Ha C, Ismail AH, Hallgren A, Halzen F, Hanson
K, Heereman D, Heimann P, Heinen D, Helbing K, Hellauer R, Hickford S, Hill GC, Hoffman KD,
Hoffmann R, Homeier A, Hoshina K, Huelsnitz W, Hulth PO, Hultqvist K, Hussain S, Ishihara A,
Jacobi E, Jacobsen J, Japaridze GS, Jlelati O, Johansson H, Kappes A, Karg T, Karle A, Kiryluk
J, Kislat F, Kläs J, Klein SR, Köhne JH, Kohnen G, Kolanoski H, Köpke L, Kopper C, Kopper S,
Koskinen DJ, Kowalski M, Krasberg M, Kroll G, Kunnen J, Kurahashi N, Kuwabara T, Labare M,
Laihem K, Landsman H, Larson MJ, Lauer R, Lesiak-Bzdak M, Lünemann J, Madsen J, Maruyama
R, Mase K, Matis HS, Mcnally F, Meagher K, Merck M, Mészáros P, Meures T, Miarecki S, Middell
E, Milke N, Miller J, Mohrmann L, Montaruli T, Morse R, Movit SM, Nahnhauer R, Naumann U,
Nowicki SC, Nygren DR, Obertacke A, Odrowski S, Olivas A, Olivo M, O’Murchadha A, Panknin S,
Paul L, Pepper JA, de los Heros CP, Pieloth D, Pirk N, Posselt J, Price PB, Przybylski GT, Rädel L,
Rawlins K, Redl P, Resconi E, Rhode W, Ribordy M, Richman M, Riedel B, Rodrigues JP, Rothmaier
F, Rott C, Ruhe T, Rutledge D, Ruzybayev B, Ryckbosch D, Salameh T, Sander HG, Santander M,
Sarkar S, Saba SM, Schatto K, Scheel M, Scheriau F, Schmidt T, Schmitz M, Schoenen S, Schöneberg
S, Schönherr L, Schönwald A, Schukraft A, Schulte L, Schulz O, Seckel D, Seo SH, Sestayo Y,
Seunarine S, Smith MWE, Soiron M, Soldin D, Spiczak GM, Spiering C, Stamatikos M, Stanev T,
Stasik A, Stezelberger T, Stokstad RG, Stößl A, Strahler EA, Ström R, Sullivan GW, Taavola H,
Taboada I, Tamburro A, Ter-Antonyan S, Tilav S, Toale PA, Toscano S, Usner M, van Eijndhoven N,
van der Drift D, Overloop AV, van Santen J, Vehring M, Voge M, Walck C, Waldenmaier T, Wallraff
M, Walter M, Wasserman R, Weaver C, Wendt C, Westerhoff S, Whitehorn N, Wiebe K, Wiebusch
CH, Williams DR, Wissing H, Wolf M, Wood TR, Woschnagg K, Xu C, Xu DL, Xu XW, Yanez
JP, Yodh G, Yoshida S, Zarzhitsky P, Ziemann J, Zilles A, Zoll M (I Collaboration) (2013) Cosmic
ray composition and energy spectrum from 1–30 PeV using the 40-string conﬁguration of Icetop and
Icecube. Astropart Phys 42:15. doi:10.1016/j.astropartphys.2012.11.003
Abdo AA, Ackermann M, Ajello M, Baldini L, Ballet J, Barbiellini G, Baring MG, Bastieri D, Baughman
BM, Bechtol K, Bellazzini R, Berenji B, Blandford RD, Bloom ED, Bonamente E, Borgland AW,
Bouvier A, Bregeon J, Brez A, Brigida M, Bruel P, Burnett TH, Buson S, Caliandro GA, Cameron
RA, Caraveo PA, Casandjian JM, Cecchi C, Çelik Ö, Chekhtman A, Cheung CC, Chiang J, Ciprini


===== PAGE 62 =====

Page 62 of 73
Astron Astrophys Rev (2013) 21:70
S, Claus R, Cohen-Tanugi J, Cominsky LR, Conrad J, Cutini S, Dermer CD, de Angelis A, de Palma
F, Digel SW, Dormody M, EdCe S, Drell PS, Dubois R, Dumora D, Farnier C, Favuzzi C, Fegan SJ,
Focke WB, Fortin P, Frailis M, Fukazawa Y, Funk S, Fusco P, Gargano F, Gasparrini D, Gehrels N,
Germani S, Giavitto G, Giebels B, Giglietto N, Giordano F, Glanzman T, Godfrey G, Grenier IA,
Grondin MH, Grove JE, Guillemot L, Guiriec S, Hanabata Y, Harding AK, Hayashida M, Hays E,
Hughes RE, Jackson MS, Jóhannesson G, Johnson AS, Johnson TJ, Johnson WN, Kamae T, Katagiri
H, Kataoka J, Katsuta J, Kawai N, Kerr M, Knödlseder J, Kocian ML, Kuss M, Lande J, Latronico
L, Lemoine-Goumard M, Longo F, Loparco F, Lott B, Lovellette MN, Lubrano P, Makeev A, Mazz-
iotta MN, McEnery JE, Meurer C, Michelson PF, Mitthumsiri W, Mizuno T, Moiseev AA, Monte
C, Monzani ME, Morselli A, Moskalenko IV, Murgia S, Nakamori T, Nolan PL, Norris JP, Nuss E,
Ohsugi T, Okumura A, Omodei N, Orlando E, Ormes JF, Paneque D, Parent D, Pelassa V, Pepe M,
Pesce-Rollins M, Piron F, Porter TA, Rainò S, Rando R, Razzano M, Reimer A, Reimer O, Reposeur
T, Ritz S, Rodriguez AY, Romani RW, Roth M, Ryde F, Sadrozinski HFW, Sanchez D, Sander A,
Saz Parkinson PM, Scargle JD, Schalk TL, Sgrò C, Siskind EJ, Smith DA, Smith PD, Spandre G,
Spinelli P, Strickman MS, Suson DJ, Tajima H, Takahashi H, Takahashi T, Tanaka T, Thayer JB,
Thayer JG, Thompson DJ, Tibaldo L, Tibolla O, Torres DF, Tosti G, Tramacere A, Uchiyama Y,
Usher TL, Vasileiou V, Venter C, Vilchez N, Vitale V, Waite AP, Wang P, Winer BL, Wood KS, Ya-
mazaki R, Ylinen T, Ziegler M (2009) Fermi LAT discovery of extended gamma-ray emission in the
direction of supernova remnant W51C. Astrophys J 706:L1–L6. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/706/1/L1.
arXiv:0910.0908
Abdo AA, Ackermann M, Ajello M, Allafort A, Baldini L, Ballet J, Barbiellini G, Bastieri D, Bechtol K,
Bellazzini R, Berenji B, Blandford RD, Bloom ED, Bonamente E, Borgland AW, Bouvier A, Brandt
TJ, Bregeon J, Brigida M, Bruel P, Buehler R, Buson S, Caliandro GA, Cameron RA, Caraveo PA,
Carrigan S, Casandjian JM, Cecchi C, Çelik Ö, Chekhtman A, Chiang J, Ciprini S, Claus R, Cohen-
Tanugi J, Conrad J, de Dermer CD, Palma F, EdCe S, Drell PS, Dubois R, Dumora D, Farnier C,
Favuzzi C, Fegan SJ, Fukazawa Y, Fukui Y, Funk S, Fusco P, Gargano F, Gehrels N, Germani S,
Giglietto N, Giordano F, Glanzman T, Godfrey G, Grenier IA, Grove JE, Guiriec S, Hadasch D,
Hanabata Y, Harding AK, Hays E, Horan D, Hughes RE, Jóhannesson G, Johnson AS, Johnson WN,
Kamae T, Katagiri H, Kataoka J, Knödlseder J, Kuss M, Lande J, Latronico L, Lee SH, Lemoine-
Goumard M, Llena Garde M, Longo F, Loparco F, Lovellette MN, Lubrano P, Makeev A, Mazziotta
MN, Michelson PF, Mitthumsiri W, Mizuno T, Moiseev AA, Monte C, Monzani ME, Morselli A,
Moskalenko IV, Murgia S, Nakamori T, Nolan PL, Norris JP, Nuss E, Ohno M, Ohsugi T, Omodei
N, Orlando E, Ormes JF, Ozaki M, Panetta JH, Parent D, Pelassa V, Pepe M, Pesce-Rollins M, Piron
F, Porter TA, Rainò S, Rando R, Razzano M, Reimer A, Reimer O, Reposeur T, Rodriguez AY,
Roth M, Sadrozinski HFW, Sander A, Saz Parkinson PM, Sgrò C, Siskind EJ, Smith DA, Smith PD,
Spandre G, Spinelli P, Strickman MS, Suson DJ, Tajima H, Takahashi H, Takahashi T, Tanaka T,
Thayer JB, Thayer JG, Thompson DJ, Tibaldo L, Tibolla O, Torres DF, Tosti G, Uchiyama Y, Uehara
T, Usher TL, Vasileiou V, Vilchez N, Vitale V, Waite AP, Wang P, Winer BL, Wood KS, Yamamoto
H, Yamazaki R, Yang Z, Ylinen T, Ziegler M (2010a) Fermi large area telescope observations of the
supernova remnant W28 (G6.4-0.1). Astrophys J 718:348–356. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/718/1/348
Abdo AA, Ackermann M, Ajello M, Baldini L, Ballet J, Barbiellini G, Baring MG, Bastieri D, Baughman
BM, Bechtol K, Bellazzini R, Berenji B, Blandford RD, Bloom ED, Bonamente E, Borgland AW,
Bregeon J, Brez A, Brigida M, Bruel P, Burnett TH, Buson S, Caliandro GA, Cameron RA, Caraveo
PA, Casandjian JM, Cecchi C, Çelik Ö, Chekhtman A, Cheung CC, Chiang J, Ciprini S, Claus R,
Cognard I, Cohen-Tanugi J, Cominsky LR, Conrad J, Cutini S, Dermer CD, de Angelis A, de Palma
F, Digel SW, do Couto e Silva E, Drell PS, Dubois R, Dumora D, Espinoza C, Farnier C, Favuzzi
C, Fegan SJ, Focke WB, Fortin P, Frailis M, Fukazawa Y, Funk S, Fusco P, Gargano F, Gasparrini
D, Gehrels N, Germani S, Giavitto G, Giebels B, Giglietto N, Giordano F, Glanzman T, Godfrey G,
Grenier IA, Grondin MH, Grove JE, Guillemot L, Guiriec S, Hanabata Y, Harding AK, Hayashida
M, Hays E, Hughes RE, Jackson MS, Jóhannesson G, Johnson AS, Johnson TJ, Johnson WN, Ka-
mae T, Katagiri H, Kataoka J, Katsuta J, Kawai N, Kerr M, Knödlseder J, Kocian ML, Kramer M,
Kuss M, Lande J, Latronico L, Lemoine-Goumard M, Longo F, Loparco F, Lott B, Lovellette MN,
Lubrano P, Lyne AG, Madejski GM, Makeev A, Mazziotta MN, McEnery JE, Meurer C, Michel-
son PF, Mitthumsiri W, Mizuno T, Monte C, Monzani ME, Morselli A, Moskalenko IV, Murgia S,
Nakamori T, Nolan PL, Norris JP, Noutsos A, Nuss E, Ohsugi T, Omodei N, Orlando E, Ormes JF,
Paneque D, Parent D, Pelassa V, Pepe M, Pesce-Rollins M, Piron F, Porter TA, Rainò S, Rando R,
Razzano M, Reimer A, Reimer O, Reposeur T, Rochester LS, Rodriguez AY, Romani RW, Roth M,
Ryde F, Sadrozinski HFW, Sanchez D, Sander A, Saz Parkinson PM, Scargle JD, Sgrò C, Siskind EJ,


===== PAGE 63 =====

P. Blasi: The origin of galactic cosmic rays
Page 63 of 73
Smith DA, Smith PD, Spandre G, Spinelli P, Stappers BW, Stecker FW, Strickman MS, Suson DJ,
Tajima H, Takahashi H, Takahashi T, Tanaka T, Thayer JB, Thayer JG, Theureau G, Thompson DJ,
Tibaldo L, Tibolla O, Torres DF, Tosti G, Tramacere A, Uchiyama Y, Usher TL, Vasileiou V, Venter
C, Vilchez N, Vitale V, Waite AP, Wang P, Winer BL, Wood KS, Yamazaki R, Ylinen T, Ziegler M
(2010b) Gamma-ray emission from the shell of supernova remnant W44 revealed by the Fermi LAT.
Science 327:1103. doi:10.1126/science.1182787
Abdo AA, Ackermann M, Ajello M, Baldini L, Ballet J, Barbiellini G, Bastieri D, Baughman BM, Bechtol
K, Bellazzini R, Berenji B, Blandford RD, Bloom ED, Bonamente E, Borgland AW, Bregeon J, Brez
A, Brigida M, Bruel P, Burnett TH, Buson S, Caliandro GA, Cameron RA, Caraveo PA, Casandjian
JM, Cecchi C, Çelik Ö, Chekhtman A, Cheung CC, Chiang J, Cillis AN, Ciprini S, Claus R, Cohen-
Tanugi J, Cominsky LR, Conrad J, Cutini S, Dermer CD, de Angelis A, de Palma F, EdCe S, Drell
PS, Drlica-Wagner A, Dubois R, Dumora D, Farnier C, Favuzzi C, Fegan SJ, Focke WB, Fortin P,
Frailis M, Fukazawa Y, Funk S, Fusco P, Gargano F, Gasparrini D, Gehrels N, Germani S, Giavitto
G, Giebels B, Giglietto N, Giordano F, Glanzman T, Godfrey G, Grenier IA, Grondin MH, Grove JE,
Guillemot L, Guiriec S, Hanabata Y, Harding AK, Hayashida M, Hughes RE, Jackson MS, Jóhan-
nesson G, Johnson AS, Johnson TJ, Johnson WN, Kamae T, Katagiri H, Kataoka J, Kawai N, Kerr
M, Knödlseder J, Kocian ML, Kuss M, Lande J, Latronico L, Lee SH, Lemoine-Goumard M, Longo
F, Loparco F, Lott B, Lovellette MN, Lubrano P, Madejski GM, Makeev A, Mazziotta MN, Meurer
C, Michelson PF, Mitthumsiri W, Moiseev AA, Monte C, Monzani ME, Morselli A, Moskalenko
IV, Murgia S, Nakamori T, Nolan PL, Norris JP, Nuss E, Ohsugi T, Orlando E, Ormes JF, Ozaki M,
Paneque D, Panetta JH, Parent D, Pelassa V, Pepe M, Pesce-Rollins M, Piron F, Porter TA, Rainò
S, Rando R, Razzano M, Reimer A, Reimer O, Reposeur T, Rochester LS, Rodriguez AY, Romani
RW, Roth M, Ryde F, Sadrozinski HFW, Sanchez D, Sander A, Saz Parkinson PM, Scargle JD,
Sgrò C, Siskind EJ, Smith DA, Smith PD, Spandre G, Spinelli P, Strickman MS, Strong AW, Suson
DJ, Tajima H, Takahashi H, Takahashi T, Tanaka T, Thayer JB, Thayer JG, Thompson DJ, Tibaldo
L, Torres DF, Tosti G, Tramacere A, Uchiyama Y, Usher TL, Van Etten A, Vasileiou V, Venter C,
Vilchez N, Vitale V, Waite AP, Wang P, Winer BL, Wood KS, Ylinen T, Ziegler M (2010c) Obser-
vation of supernova remnant IC 443 with the Fermi large area telescope. Astrophys J 712:459–468.
doi:10.1088/0004-637X/712/1/459. arXiv:1002.2198
Abdo AA, Ackermann M, Ajello M, Allafort A, Baldini L, Ballet J, Barbiellini G, Baring MG, Bastieri D,
Bellazzini R, Berenji B, Blandford RD, Bloom ED, Bonamente E, Borgland AW, Bouvier A, Brandt
TJ, Bregeon J, Brigida M, Bruel P, Buehler R, Buson S, Caliandro GA, Cameron RA, Caraveo PA,
Casandjian JM, Cecchi C, Chaty S, Chekhtman A, Cheung CC, Chiang J, Cillis AN, Ciprini S, Claus
R, Cohen-Tanugi J, Conrad J, Corbel S, Cutini S, de Angelis A, de Palma F, Dermer CD, Digel SW,
Silva EC, Drell PS, Drlica-Wagner A, Dubois R, Dumora D, Favuzzi C, Ferrara EC, Fortin P, Frailis
M, Fukazawa Y, Fukui Y, Funk S, Fusco P, Gargano F, Gasparrini D, Gehrels N, Germani S, Giglietto
N, Giordano F, Giroletti M, Glanzman T, Godfrey G, Grenier IA, Grondin MH, Guiriec S, Hadasch
D, Hanabata Y, Harding AK, Hayashida M, Hayashi K, Hays E, Horan D, Jackson MS, Jóhannesson
G, Johnson AS, Kamae T, Katagiri H, Kataoka J, Kerr M, Knödlseder J, Kuss M, Lande J, Latronico
L, Lee SH, Lemoine-Goumard M, Longo F, Loparco F, Lovellette MN, Lubrano P, Madejski GM,
Makeev A, Mazziotta MN, McEnery JE, Michelson PF, Mignani RP, Mitthumsiri W, Mizuno T,
Moiseev AA, Monte C, Monzani ME, Morselli A, Moskalenko IV, Murgia S, Naumann-Godo M,
Nolan PL, Norris JP, Nuss E, Ohsugi T, Okumura A, Orlando E, Ormes JF, Paneque D, Parent D,
Pelassa V, Pesce-Rollins M, Pierbattista M, Piron F, Pohl M, Porter TA, Rainò S, Rando R, Razzano
M, Reimer O, Reposeur T, Ritz S, Romani RW, Roth M, Sadrozinski HFW, Saz Parkinson PM, Sgrò
C, Smith DA, Smith PD, Spandre G, Spinelli P, Strickman MS, Tajima H, Takahashi H, Takahashi T,
Tanaka T, Thayer JG, Thayer JB, Thompson DJ, Tibaldo L, Tibolla O, Torres DF, Tosti G, Tramacere
A, Troja E, Uchiyama Y, Vandenbroucke J, Vasileiou V, Vianello G, Vilchez N, Vitale V, Waite AP,
Wang P, Winer BL, Wood KS, Yamamoto H, Yamazaki R, Yang Z, Ziegler M (2011) Observations
of the Young supernova remnant RX J1713.7-3946 with the Fermi large area telescope. Astrophys J
734:28. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/734/1/28. arXiv:1103.5727
Abraham J, Abreu P, Aglietta M, Ahn EJ, Allard D, Allekotte I, Allen J, Alvarez-Muñiz J, Ambrosio M,
Anchordoqui L et al (2010) Measurement of the depth of maximum of extensive air showers above
1018 eV. Phys Rev Lett 104(9):091101. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.104.091101. arXiv:1002.0699
Acciari VA, Aliu E, Arlen T, Aune T, Beilicke M, Benbow W, Bradbury SM, Buckley JH, Bugaev V,
Byrum K, Cannon A, Cesarini A, Ciupik L, Collins-Hughes E, Cui W, Dickherber R, Duke C, Er-
rando M, Finley JP, Finnegan G, Fortson L, Furniss A, Galante N, Gall D, Gillanders GH, Godambe
S, Grifﬁn S, Grube J, Guenette R, Gyuk G, Hanna D, Holder J, Hughes JP, Hui CM, Humensky


===== PAGE 64 =====

Page 64 of 73
Astron Astrophys Rev (2013) 21:70
TB, Kaaret P, Karlsson N, Kertzman M, Kieda D, Krawczynski H, Krennrich F, Lang MJ, LeBo-
hec S, Madhavan AS, Maier G, Majumdar P, McArthur S, McCann A, Moriarty P, Mukherjee R,
Ong RA, Orr M, Otte AN, Pandel D, Park NH, Perkins JS, Pohl M, Quinn J, Ragan K, Reyes LC,
Reynolds PT, Roache E, Rose HJ, Saxon DB, Schroedter M, Sembroski GH, Senturk GD, Slane P,
Smith AW, Teši´c G, Theiling M, Thibadeau S, Tsurusaki K, Varlotta A, Vassiliev VV, Vincent S,
Vivier M, Wakely SP, Ward JE, Weekes TC, Weinstein A, Weisgarber T, Williams DA, Wood M,
Zitzer B (2011) Discovery of TeV gamma-ray emission from Tycho’s supernova remnant. Astrophys
J 730:L20. doi:10.1088/2041-8205/730/2/L20. arXiv:1102.3871
Acharya BS et al (2013) Introducing the CTA concept. Astropart Phys 43(0):3–18. doi:10.1016/j.
astropartphys.2013.01.007. http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0927650513000169
Achterberg A (1983) Modiﬁcation of scattering waves and its importance for shock acceleration. Astron
Astrophys 119:274
Ackermann M, Ajello M, Allafort A, Baldini L, Ballet J, Barbiellini G, Bastieri D, Belﬁore A, Bellazzini R,
Berenji B, Blandford RD, Bloom ED, Bonamente E, Borgland AW, Bottacini E, Brigida M, Bruel P,
Buehler R, Buson S, Caliandro GA, Cameron RA, Caraveo PA, Casandjian JM, Cecchi C, Chekhtman
A, Cheung CC, Chiang J, Ciprini S, Claus R, Cohen-Tanugi J, Angelis AD, Palma FD, Dermer CD,
Silva EDCE, Drell PS, Dumora D, Favuzzi C, Fegan SJ, Focke WB, Fortin P, Fukazawa Y, Fusco P,
Gargano F, Germani S, Giglietto N, Giordano F, Giroletti M, Glanzman T, Godfrey G, Grenier IA,
Guillemot L, Guiriec S, Hadasch D, Hanabata Y, Harding AK, Hayashida M, Hayashi K, Hays E,
Jóhannesson G, Johnson AS, Kamae T, Katagiri H, Kataoka J, Kerr M, Knödlseder J, Kuss M, Lande
J, Latronico L, Lee SH, Longo F, Loparco F, Lott B, Lovellette MN, Lubrano P, Martin P, Mazziotta
MN, Mcenery JE, Mehault J, Michelson PF, Mitthumsiri W, Mizuno T, Monte C, Monzani ME,
Morselli A, Moskalenko IV, Murgia S, Naumann-Godo M, Nolan PL, Norris JP, Nuss E, Ohsugi T,
Okumura A, Orlando E, Ormes JF, Ozaki M, Paneque D, Parent D, Pesce-Rollins M, Pierbattista M,
Piron F, Pohl M, Prokhorov D, Rainò S, Rando R, Razzano M, Reposeur T, Ritz S, Saz Parkinson PM,
Sgrò C, Siskind EJ, Smith PD, Spinelli P, Strong AW, Takahashi H, Tanaka T, Thayer JG, Thayer JB,
Thompson DJ, Tibaldo L, Torres DF, Tosti G, Tramacere A, Troja E, Uchiyama Y, Vandenbroucke
J, Vasileiou V, Vianello G, Vitale V, Waite AP, Wang P, Winer BL, Wood KS, Yang Z, Zimmer S,
Bontemps S (2011) A cocoon of freshly accelerated cosmic rays detected by Fermi in the Cygnus
superbubble. Science 334:1103. doi:10.1126/science.1210311
Ackermann M, Ajello M, Allafort A, Baldini L, Ballet J, Barbiellini G, Baring MG, Bastieri D, Bechtol
K, Bellazzini R, Blandford RD, Bloom ED, Bonamente E, Borgland AW, Bottacini E, Brandt TJ,
Bregeon J, Brigida M, Bruel P, Buehler R, Busetto G, Buson S, Caliandro GA, Cameron RA, Caraveo
PA, Casandjian JM, Cecchi C, Çelik Ö, Charles E, Chaty S, Chaves RCG, Chekhtman A, Cheung
CC, Chiang J, Chiaro G, Cillis AN, Ciprini S, Claus R, Cohen-Tanugi J, Cominsky LR, Conrad
J, Corbel S, Cutini S, D’ammando F, Angelis AD, Palma FD, Dermer CD, Silva EDCE, Drell PS,
Drlica-Wagner A, Falletti L, Favuzzi C, Ferrara EC, Franckowiak A, Fukazawa Y, Funk S, Fusco P,
Gargano F, Germani S, Giglietto N, Giommi P, Giordano F, Giroletti M, Glanzman T, Godfrey G,
Grenier IA, Grondin MH, Grove JE, Guiriec S, Hadasch D, Hanabata Y, Harding AK, Hayashida
M, Hayashi K, Hays E, Hewitt JW, Hill AB, Hughes RE, Jackson MS, Jogler T, Jóhannesson G,
Johnson AS, Kamae T, Kataoka J, Katsuta J, Knödlseder J, Kuss M, Lande J, Larsson S, Latronico
L, Lemoine-Goumard M, Longo F, Loparco F, Lovellette MN, Lubrano P, Madejski GM, Massaro
F, Mayer M, Mazziotta MN, Mcenery JE, Mehault J, Michelson PF, Mignani RP, Mitthumsiri W,
Mizuno T, Moiseev AA, Monzani ME, Morselli A, Moskalenko IV, Murgia S, Nakamori T, Nemmen
R, Nuss E, Ohno M, Ohsugi T, Omodei N, Orienti M, Orlando E, Ormes JF, Paneque D, Perkins
JS, Pesce-Rollins M, Piron F, Pivato G, Rainò S, Rando R, Razzano M, Razzaque S, Reimer A,
Reimer O, Ritz S, Romoli C, Sánchez-Conde M, Schulz A, Sgrò C, Simeon PE, Siskind EJ, Smith
DA, Spandre G, Spinelli P, Stecker FW, Strong AW, Suson DJ, Tajima H, Takahashi H, Takahashi T,
Tanaka T, Thayer JG, Thayer JB, Thompson DJ, Thorsett SE, Tibaldo L, Tibolla O, Tinivella M, Troja
E, Uchiyama Y, Usher TL, Vandenbroucke J, Vasileiou V, Vianello G, Vitale V, Waite AP, Werner M,
Winer BL, Wood KS, Wood M, Yamazaki R, Yang Z, Zimmer S (2013) Detection of the characteristic
pion-decay signature in supernova remnants. Science 339:807. doi:10.1126/science.1231160
Adriani O, Barbarino GC, Bazilevskaya GA, Bellotti R, Boezio M, Bogomolov EA, Bonechi L, Bongi M,
Bonvicini V, Bottai S, Bruno A, Cafagna F, Campana D, Carlson P, Casolino M, Castellini G, Pascale
MPD, Rosa GD, Fedele D, Galper AM, Grishantseva L, Hofverberg P, Koldashov SV, Krutkov SY,
Kvashnin AN, Leonov A, Malvezzi V, Marcelli L, Menn W, Mikhailov VV, Minori M, Mocchiutti E,
Nagni M, Orsi S, Osteria G, Papini P, Pearce M, Picozza P, Ricci M, Ricciarini SB, Simon M, Sparvoli
R, Spillantini P, Stozhkov YI, Taddei E, Vacchi A, Vannuccini E, Vasilyev G, Voronov SA, Yurkin


===== PAGE 65 =====

P. Blasi: The origin of galactic cosmic rays
Page 65 of 73
YT, Zampa G, Zampa N, Zverev VG (2008) A new measurement of the antiproton-to-proton ﬂux ratio
up to 100 GeV in the cosmic radiation. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.102.051101. arXiv:0810.4994v2
Adriani O, Barbarino GC, Bazilevskaya GA, Bellotti R, Boezio M, Bogomolov EA, Bonechi L, Bongi
M, Bonvicini V, Bottai S, Bruno A, Cafagna F, Campana D, Carlson P, Casolino M, Castellini G,
de Pascale MP, de Rosa G, de Simone N, di Felice V, Galper AM, Grishantseva L, Hofverberg P,
Koldashov SV, Krutkov SY, Kvashnin AN, Leonov A, Malvezzi V, Marcelli L, Menn W, Mikhailov
VV, Mocchiutti E, Orsi S, Osteria G, Papini P, Pearce M, Picozza P, Ricci M, Ricciarini SB, Simon
M, Sparvoli R, Spillantini P, Stozhkov YI, Vacchi A, Vannuccini E, Vasilyev G, Voronov SA, Yurkin
YT, Zampa G, Zampa N, Zverev VG (2009) An anomalous positron abundance in cosmic rays with
energies 1.5–100 GeV. Nature 458:607. doi:10.1038/nature07942
Adriani O, Barbarino GC, Bazilevskaya GA, Bellotti R, Boezio M, Bogomolov EA, Bonechi L, Bongi
M, Bonvicini V, Borisov S, Bottai S, Bruno A, Cafagna F, Campana D, Carbone R, Carlson P, Ca-
solino M, Castellini G, Consiglio L, Pascale MPD, Santis CD, Simone ND, Felice VD, Galper AM,
Gillard W, Grishantseva L, Jerse G, Karelin AV, Koldashov SV, Krutkov SY, Kvashnin AN, Leonov A,
Malakhov V, Malvezzi V, Marcelli L, Mayorov AG, Menn W, Mikhailov VV, Mocchiutti E, Monaco
A, Mori N, Nikonov N, Osteria G, Palma F, Papini P, Pearce M, Picozza P, Pizzolotto C, Ricci M,
Ricciarini SB, Rossetto L, Sarkar R, Simon M, Sparvoli R, Spillantini P, Stozhkov YI, Vacchi A,
Vannuccini E, Vasilyev G, Voronov SA, Yurkin YT, Zampa G, Zampa N, Zverev VG (2011) Pamela
measurements of cosmic-ray proton and helium spectra. Science 332:69–72
Aguilar M, Alberti G, Alpat B, Alvino A, Ambrosi G, Andeen K, Anderhub H, Arruda L, Azzarello P,
Bachlechner A, Barao F, Baret B, Barrau A, Barrin L, Bartoloni A, Basara L, Basili A, Batalha L,
Bates J, Battiston R, Bazo J, Becker R, Becker U, Behlmann M, Beischer B, Berdugo J, Berges P,
Bertucci B, Bigongiari G, Biland A, Bindi V, Bizzaglia S, Boella G, de Boer W, Bollweg K, Bolmont
J, Borgia B, Borsini S, Boschini MJ, Boudoul G, Bourquin M, Brun P, Buénerd M, Burger J, Burger
W, Cadoux F, Cai XD, Capell M, Casadei D, Casaus J, Cascioli V, Castellini G, Cernuda I, Cervelli F,
Chae MJ, Chang YH, Chen AI, Chen CR, Chen H, Cheng GM, Chen HS, Cheng L, Chernoplyiokov
N, Chikanian A, Choumilov E, Choutko V, Chung CH, Clark C, Clavero R, Coignet G, Commichau
V, Consolandi C, Contin A, Corti C, Dios MTC, Coste B, Crespo D, Cui Z, Dai M, Delgado C, Torre
SD, Demirkoz B, Dennett P, Derome L, Falco SD, Diao XH, Diago A, Djambazov L, Díaz C, von
Doetinchem P, Du WJ, Dubois JM, Duperay R, Duranti M, D’Urso D, Egorov A, Eline A, Eppling
FJ, Eronen T, van Es J, Esser H, Falvard A, Fiandrini E, Fiasson A, Finch E, Fisher P, Flood K, Foglio
R, Fohey M, Fopp S, Fouque N, Galaktionov Y, Gallilee M, Gallin-Martel L, Gallucci G, García B,
García J, García-López R, García-Tabares L, Gargiulo C, Gast H, Gebauer I, Gentile S, Gervasi M,
Gillard W, Giovacchini F, Girard L, Goglov P, Gong J, Goy-Henningsen C, Grandi D, Graziani M,
Grechko A, Gross A, Guerri I, de la Guía C, Guo KH, Habiby M, Haino S, Hauler F, He ZH, Heil
M, Heilig J, Hermel R, Hofer H, Huang ZC, Hungerford W, Incagli M, Ionica M, Jacholkowska
A, Jang WY, Jinchi H, Jongmanns M, Journet L, Jungermann L, Karpinski W, Kim GN, Kim KS,
Kirn T, Kossakowski R, Koulemzine A, Kounina O, Kounine A, Koutsenko V, Krafczyk MS, Laudi
E, Laurenti G, Lauritzen C, Lebedev A, Lee MW, Lee SC, Leluc C, Vargas HL, Lepareur V, Li
JQ, Li Q, Li TX, Li W, Li ZH, Lipari P, Lin CH, Liu D, Liu H, Lomtadze T, Lu YS, Lucidi S,
Lübelsmeyer K, Luo JZ, Lustermann W, Lv S, Madsen J, Majka R, Malinin A, Mañá C, Marín J,
Martin T, Martínez G, Masciocchi F, Masi N, Maurin D, McInturff A, McIntyre P, Menchaca-Rocha
A, Meng Q, Menichelli M, Mereu I, Millinger M, Mo DC, Molina M, Mott P, Mujunen A, Natale
S, Nemeth P, Ni JQ, Nikonov N, Nozzoli F, Nunes P, Obermeier A, Oh S, Oliva A, Palmonari F,
Palomares C, Paniccia M, Papi A, Park WH, Pauluzzi M, Pauss F, Pauw A, Pedreschi E, Pensotti
S, Pereira R, Perrin E, Pessina G, Pierschel G, Pilo F, Piluso A, Pizzolotto C, Plyaskin V, Pochon J,
Pohl M, Poireau V, Porter S, Pouxe J, Putze A, Quadrani L, Qi XN, Rancoita PG, Rapin D, Ren ZL,
Ricol JS, Riihonen E, Rodríguez I, Roeser U, Rosier-Lees S, Rossi L, Rozhkov A, Rozza D, Sabellek
A, Sagdeev R, Sandweiss J, Santos B, Saouter P, Sarchioni M, Schael S, Schinzel D, Schmanau M,
Schwering G, von Dratzig AS, Scolieri G, Seo ES, Shan BS, Shi JY, Shi YM, Siedenburg T, Siedling
R, Son D, Spada F, Spinella F, Steuer M, Stiff K, Sun W, Sun WH, Sun XH, Tacconi M, Tang CP,
Tang XW, Tang ZC, Tao L, Tassan-Viol J, Ting SCC, Ting SM, Titus C, Tomassetti N, Toral F, Torsti
J, Tsai JR, Tutt JC, Ulbricht J, Urban T, Vagelli V, Valente E, Vannini C, Valtonen E, Trevino MV,
Vaurynovich S, Vecchi M, Vergain M, Verlaat B, Vescovi C, Vialle JP, Viertel G, Volpini G, Wang D,
Wang NH, Wang QL, Wang RS, Wang X, Wang ZX, Wallraff W, Weng ZL, Willenbrock M, Wlochal
M, Wu H, Wu KY, Wu ZS, Xiao WJ, Xie S, Xiong RQ, Xin GM, Xu NS, Xu W, Yan Q, Yang J, Yang
M, Ye QH, Yi H, Yu YJ, Yu ZQ, Zeissler S, Zhang JG, Zhang Z, Zhang MM, Zheng ZM, Zhuang HL,
Zhukov V, Zichichi A, Zuccon P, Zurbach C (2013). First result from the alpha magnetic spectrometer


===== PAGE 66 =====

Page 66 of 73
Astron Astrophys Rev (2013) 21:70
on the international space station: precision measurement of the positron fraction in primary cosmic
rays of 0.5–350 GeV. Phys Rev Lett 110:141102. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.110.141102
Aharonian F, Akhperjanian AG, Bazer-Bachi AR, Beilicke M, Benbow W, Berge D, Bernlöhr K, Boisson
C, Bolz O, Borrel V, Braun I, Breitling F, Brown AM, Chadwick PM, Chounet LM, Cornils R, Costa-
mante L, Degrange B, Dickinson HJ, Djannati-Ataï A, O’C Drury L, Dubus G, Emmanoulopoulos D,
Espigat P, Feinstein F, Fontaine G, Fuchs Y, Funk S, Gallant YA, Giebels B, Glicenstein JF, Goret P,
Hadjichristidis C, Hauser D, Hauser M, Heinzelmann G, Henri G, Hermann G, Hinton JA, Hofmann
W, Holleran M, Horns D, Jacholkowska A, de Jager OC, KhéliﬁB, Klages S, Komin N, Konopelko A,
Latham IJ, Le Gallou R, Lemière A, Lemoine-Goumard M, Lohse T, Martin JM, Martineau-Huynh
O, Marcowith A, Masterson C, McComb TJL, de Naurois M, Nedbal D, Nolan SJ, Noutsos A, Or-
ford KJ, Osborne JL, Ouchrif M, Panter M, Pelletier G, Pita S, Pühlhofer G, Punch M, Raubenheimer
BC, Raue M, Rayner SM, Reimer A, Reimer O, Ripken J, Rob L, Rolland L, Rowell G, Sahakian
V, Saugé L, Schlenker S, Schlickeiser R, Schuster C, Schwanke U, Siewert M, Sol H, Spangler D,
Steenkamp R, Stegmann C, Superina G, Tavernet JP, Terrier R, Théoret CG, Tluczykont M, van Eldik
C, Vasileiadis G, Venter C, Vincent P, Völk HJ, Wagner SJ (2006) A detailed spectral and morpho-
logical study of the gamma-ray supernova remnant RX J1713.7-3946 with HESS. Astron Astrophys
449:223–242. doi:10.1051/0004-6361:20054279. arXiv:astro-ph/0511678
Aharonian F, Akhperjanian AG, Bazer-Bachi AR, Beilicke M, Benbow W, Berge D, Bernlöhr K, Boisson
C, Bolz O, Borrel V, Braun I, Brion E, Brown AM, Bühler R, Büsching I, Carrigan S, Chadwick PM,
Chounet LM, Coignet G, Cornils R, Costamante L, Degrange B, Dickinson HJ, Djannati-Ataï A, O’C
Drury L, Dubus G, Egberts K, Emmanoulopoulos D, Espigat P, Feinstein F, Ferrero E, Fiasson A,
Fontaine G, Funk S, Funk S, Füßling M, Gallant YA, Giebels B, Glicenstein JF, Glück B, Goret P,
Hadjichristidis C, Hauser D, Hauser M, Heinzelmann G, Henri G, Hermann G, Hinton JA, Hoffmann
A, Hofmann W, Holleran M, Hoppe S, Horns D, Jacholkowska A, de Jager OC, Jager OC, Kendziorra
E, Kerschhaggl M, KhéliﬁB, Komin N, Konopelko A, Kosack K, Lamanna G, Latham IJ, Le Gallou
R, Lemière A, Lemoine-Goumard M, Lohse T, Martin JM, Martineau-Huynh O, Marcowith A, Mas-
terson C, Maurin G, McComb TJL, Moulin, E, de Naurois M, Nedbal D, Nolan SJ, Noutsos A, Olive
JP, Orford KJ, Osborne JL, Panter M, Pelletier G, Pita S, Pühlhofer G, Punch M, Ranchon S, Rauben-
heimer BC, Raue M, Rayner SM, Reimer A, Reimer O, Ripken J, Rob L, Rolland L, Rosier-Lees S,
Rowell G, Sahakian V, Santangelo A, Saugé L, Schlenker S, Schlickeiser R, Schröder R, Schwanke
U, Schwarzburg S, Schwemmer S, Shalchi A, Sol H, Spangler D, Spanier F, Steenkamp R, Stegmann
C, Superina G, Tam PH, Tavernet JP, Terrier R, Tluczykont M, van Eldik C, Vasileiadis G, Venter
C, Vialle JP, Vincent P, Völk HJ, Wagner SJ (2007) Primary particle acceleration above 100 TeV in
the shell-type supernova remnant RX J1713.7-3946 with deep HESS observations. Astron Astrophys
464:235–243. doi:10.1051/0004-6361:20066381. arXiv:astro-ph/0611813
Aharonian FA (2013) Gamma rays from supernova remnants. Astropart Phys 43:71–80. doi:10.1016/j.
astropartphys.2012.08.007
Aharonian FA, Akhperjanian AG, Aye KM, Bazer-Bachi AR, Beilicke M, Benbow W, Berge D, Berghaus
P, Bernlöhr K, Bolz O, Boisson C, Borgmeier C, Breitling F, Brown AM, Bussons Gordo J, Chadwick
PM, Chitnis VR, Chounet LM, Cornils R, Costamante L, Degrange B, Djannati-Ataï A, Drury LO,
Ergin T, Espigat P, Feinstein F, Fleury P, Fontaine G, Funk S, Gallant YA, Giebels B, Gillessen S,
Goret P, Guy J, Hadjichristidis C, Hauser M, Heinzelmann G, Henri G, Hermann G, Hinton JA,
Hofmann W, Holleran M, Horns D, de Jager OC, Jung I, KhéliﬁB, Komin N, Konopelko A, Latham
IJ, Le Gallou R, Lemoine M, Lemière A, Leroy N, Lohse T, Marcowith A, Masterson C, McComb
TJL, de Naurois M, Nolan SJ, Noutsos A, Orford KJ, Osborne JL, Ouchrif M, Panter M, Pelletier G,
Pita S, Pohl M, Pühlhofer G, Punch M, Raubenheimer BC, Raue M, Raux J, Rayner SM, Redondo
I, Reimer A, Reimer O, Ripken J, Rivoal M, Rob L, Rolland L, Rowell G, Sahakian V, Saugé L,
Schlenker S, Schlickeiser R, Schuster C, Schwanke U, Siewert M, Sol H, Steenkamp R, Stegmann C,
Tavernet JP, Théoret CG, Tluczykont M, van der Walt DJ, Vasileiadis G, Vincent P, Visser B, Völk
HJ, Wagner SJ (2004) High-energy particle acceleration in the shell of a supernova remnant. Nature
432:75–77. doi:10.1038/nature02960. arXiv:astro-ph/0411533
Ahn HS, Allison P, Bagliesi MG, Beatty JJ, Bigongiari G, Childers JT, Conklin NB, Coutu S, Duvernois
MA, Ganel O, Han JH, Jeon JA, Kim KC, Lee MH, Lutz L, Maestro P, Malinin A, Marrocchesi PS,
Minnick S, Mognet SI, Nam J, Nam S, Nutter SL, Park IH, Park NH, Seo ES, Sina R, Wu J, Yang
J, Yoon YS, Zei R, Zinn SY (2010) Discrepant hardening observed in cosmic-ray elemental spectra.
Astrophys J Lett 714:L89. doi:10.1088/2041-8205/714/1/L89
Aloisio R, Blasi P (2013) Propagation of galactic cosmic rays in the presence of self-generated turbulence.
J Cosmol Astropart Phys 7:001. doi:10.1088/1475-7516/2013/07/001. arXiv:1306.2018


===== PAGE 67 =====

P. Blasi: The origin of galactic cosmic rays
Page 67 of 73
Aloisio R, Berezinsky V, Gazizov A (2012) Transition from galactic to extragalactic cosmic rays. Astropart
Phys 39:129–143. doi:10.1016/j.astropartphys.2012.09.007. arXiv:1211.0494
Amato E, Blasi P (2005) A general solution to non-linear particle acceleration at non-relativistic shock
waves. Mon Not R Astron Soc Lett 364:L76. doi:10.1111/j.1745-3933.2005.00110.x
Amato E, Blasi P (2006) Non-linear particle acceleration at non-relativistic shock waves in the presence of
self-generated turbulence. Mon Not R Astron Soc 371(3):1251–1258. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2966.2006.
10739.x
Amato E, Blasi P (2009) A kinetic approach to cosmic-ray-induced streaming instability at supernova
shocks. Mon Not R Astron Soc 392(4):1591–1600. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2966.2008.14200.x
Apel WD, Arteaga-Velàzquez JC, Bekk K, Bertaina M, Blümer J, Bozdog H, Brancus IM, Cantoni E,
Chiavassa A, Cossavella F, Daumiller K, de Souza V, Pierro FD, Doll P, Engel R, Engler J, Finger M,
Fuchs B, Fuhrmann D, Gils HJ, Glasstetter R, Grupen C, Haungs A, Heck D, Hörandel JR, Huber
D, Huege T, Kampert KH, Kang D, Klages HO, Link K, Łuczak P, Ludwig M, Mathes HJ, Mayer
HJ, Melissas M, Milke J, Mitrica B, Morello C, Oehlschläger J, Ostapchenko S, Palmieri N, Petcu
M, Pierog T, Rebel H, Roth M, Schieler H, Schoo S, Schröder FG, Sima O, Toma G, Trinchero
GC, Ulrich H, Weindl A, Wochele J, Wommer M, Zabierowski J (2013) Ankle-like feature in the
energy spectrum of light elements of cosmic rays observed with KASCADE-GRANDE. Phys Rev D
87:081101(R)
Axford WI, Leer E, Skadron G (1977) The acceleration of cosmic rays by shock waves. In: International
cosmic ray conference, vol 11, pp 132–137
Axford WI, Leer E, McKenzie JF (1982) The structure of cosmic ray shocks. Astron Astrophys 111:317–
325
Baade W, Zwicky F (1934) Remarks on super-novae and cosmic rays. Phys Rev 46:76. doi:10.1103/
PhysRev.46.76.2
Ballet J (2006) X-ray synchrotron emission from supernova remnants. Adv Space Res 37:1902–1908.
doi:10.1016/j.asr.2005.03.047. arXiv:astro-ph/0503309
Bell AR (1978a) The acceleration of cosmic rays in shock fronts. I. Mon Not R Astron Soc 182:147
Bell AR (1978b) The acceleration of cosmic rays in shock fronts. II. Mon Not R Astron Soc 182:443
Bell AR (2004) Turbulent ampliﬁcation of magnetic ﬁeld and diffusive shock acceleration of cosmic rays.
Mon Not R Astron Soc 353:550. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2966.2004.08097.x
Bell AR (2005) The interaction of cosmic rays and magnetized plasma. Mon Not R Astron Soc 358:181–
187. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2966.2005.08774.x
Bell AR, Lucek SG (2001) Cosmic ray acceleration to very high energy through the non-linear am-
pliﬁcation by cosmic rays of the seed magnetic ﬁeld. Mon Not R Astron Soc 321:433–438.
doi:10.1046/j.1365-8711.2001.04063.x
Bell AR, Schure KM, Reville B, Giacinti G (2013) Cosmic-ray acceleration and escape from supernova
remnants. Mon Not R Astron Soc 431:415–429. doi:10.1093/mnras/stt179. arXiv:1301.7264
Berezhko EG, Ellison DC (1999) A simple model of nonlinear diffusive shock acceleration. Astrophys J
526:385–399. doi:10.1086/307993
Berezhko EG, Völk HJ (1997) Kinetic theory of cosmic rays and gamma rays in supernova remnants. I.
Uniform interstellar medium. Astropart Phys 7:183–202. doi:10.1016/S0927-6505(97)00016-9
Berezhko EG, Völk HJ (2000) Kinetic theory of cosmic ray and gamma-ray production in supernova
remnants expanding into wind bubbles. Astron Astrophys 357:283–300. arXiv:astro-ph/0002411
Berezhko EG, Völk HJ (2007) Spectrum of cosmic rays produced in supernova remnants. Astrophys J
661:L175. doi:10.1086/518737
Berezhko EG, Yelshin VK, Ksenofontov LT (1994) Numerical investigation of cosmic ray acceleration in
supernova remnants. Astropart Phys 2:215–227. doi:10.1016/0927-6505(94)90043-4
Berezhko EG, Ksenofontov LT, Völk HJ (2013) The nature of gamma-ray emission of Tycho’s supernova
remnant. Astrophys J 763:14. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/763/1/14. arXiv:1211.5398
Blandford R, Eichler D (1987) Particle acceleration at astrophysical shocks: a theory of cosmic ray origin.
Phys Rep 154:1. doi:10.1016/0370-1573(87)90134-7
Blandford RD, Ostriker JP (1978) Particle acceleration by astrophysical shocks. Astrophys J 221:L29–
L32. doi:10.1086/182658
Blasi P (2002) A semi-analytical approach to non-linear shock acceleration. Astropart Phys 16:429.
doi:10.1016/S0927-6505(01)00127-X
Blasi P (2004) Nonlinear shock acceleration in the presence of seed particles. Astropart Phys 21:45.
doi:10.1016/j.astropartphys.2003.10.008


===== PAGE 68 =====

Page 68 of 73
Astron Astrophys Rev (2013) 21:70
Blasi P, Amato E (2012a) Diffusive propagation of cosmic rays from supernova remnants in the galaxy. I.
Spectrum and chemical composition. J Cosmol Astropart Phys 01:010. doi:10.1088/1475-7516/2012/
01/010
Blasi P, Amato E (2012b) Diffusive propagation of cosmic rays from supernova remnants in the galaxy. II:
Anisotropy. J Cosmol Astropart Phys 01:011. doi:10.1088/1475-7516/2012/01/011
Blasi P, Gabici S, Vannoni G (2005) On the role of injection in kinetic approaches to non-
linear particle acceleration at non-relativistic shock waves. Mon Not R Astron Soc 361:907.
doi:10.1111/j.1365-2966.2005.09227.x
Blasi P, Amato E, Caprioli D (2007) The maximum momentum of particles accelerated at cosmic ray
modiﬁed shocks. Mon Not R Astron Soc 375(4):1471–1478. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2966.2006.11412.x
Blasi P, Amato E, Serpico PD (2012a) Spectral breaks as a signature of cosmic ray induced turbulence in
the galaxy. Phys Rev Lett 109:61101. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.109.061101
Blasi P, Morlino G, Bandiera R, Amato E, Caprioli D (2012) Collisionless shocks in a partially ionized
medium. I. Neutral return ﬂux and its effects on acceleration of test particles. Astrophys J 755:121.
doi:10.1088/0004-637X/755/2/121. arXiv:1202.3080
Brandt TJ, Acero F, de Palma F, Hewitt JW, Renaud M (Fermi LAT Collaboration) (2013a) The 1st Fermi
LAT SNR catalog: constraining the cosmic ray contribution. arXiv:1307.6571
Brandt TJ, Ballet J, de Palma F, Johannesson G, Tibaldo L (Fermi LAT Collaboration) (2013b) The 1st
Fermi LAT SNR catalog: the impact of interstellar emission modeling. arXiv:1307.6572
Bykov AM, Toptygin IN (2001) A model of particle acceleration to high energies by multiple supernova
explosions in OB associations. Astron Lett 27:625–633. doi:10.1134/1.1404456
Bykov AM, Osipov SM, Toptygin IN (2009) Long-wavelength MHD instability in the prefront of colli-
sionless shocks with accelerated particles. Astron Lett 35:555. doi:10.1134/S1063773709080052
Bykov AM, Ellison DC, Renaud M (2011a) Magnetic ﬁelds in cosmic particle acceleration sources.
doi:10.1007/s11214-011-9761-4. arXiv:1105.0130v1
Bykov AM, Osipov SM, Ellison DC (2011b) Cosmic ray current driven turbulence in shocks with efﬁcient
particle acceleration: the oblique, long-wavelength mode instability. Mon Not R Astron Soc 410:39–
52. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2966.2010.17421.x. arXiv:1010.0408
Bykov AM, Brandenburg A, Malkov MA, Osipov SM (2013) Microphysics of cosmic ray driven plasma
instabilities. Space Sci Rev. doi:10.1007/s11214-013-9988-3
Caprioli D (2011) Understanding hadronic gamma-ray emission from supernova remnants. J Cosmol As-
tropart Phys 05:026. doi:10.1088/1475-7516/2011/05/026
Caprioli D (2012) Cosmic-ray acceleration in supernova remnants: non-linear theory revised. J Cosmol
Astropart Phys 07:038. doi:10.1088/1475-7516/2012/07/038
Caprioli D, Spitkovsky A (2013) Cosmic-ray-induced ﬁlamentation instability in collisionless shocks. As-
trophys J 765:L20. doi:10.1088/2041-8205/765/1/L20. arXiv:1211.6765
Caprioli D, Blasi P, Amato E, Vietri M (2008) Dynamical effects of self-generated magnetic ﬁelds in
cosmic-ray-modiﬁed shocks. Astrophys J 679:L139. doi:10.1086/589505
Caprioli D, Blasi P, Amato E (2009a) On the escape of particles from cosmic ray modiﬁed shocks. Mon
Not R Astron Soc 396(4):2065–2073. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2966.2008.14298.x
Caprioli D, Blasi P, Amato E, Vietri M (2009b) Dynamical feedback of self-generated magnetic ﬁelds
in cosmic ray modiﬁed shocks. Mon Not R Astron Soc 395(2):895–906. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2966.
2009.14570.x
Caprioli D, Amato E, Blasi P (2010a) The contribution of supernova remnants to the galactic cosmic ray
spectrum. Astropart Phys 33(3):160–168. doi:10.1016/j.astropartphys.2010.01.002
Caprioli D, Kang H, Vladimirov AE, Jones TW (2010b) Comparison of different methods for non-linear
diffusive shock acceleration. Mon Not R Astron Soc 407:1773–1783. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2966.2010.
17013.x. arXiv:1005.2127
Cassam-Chenaï G, Hughes JP, Ballet J, Decourchelle A (2007) The blast wave of Tycho’s supernova
remnant. Astrophys J 665:315–340. doi:10.1086/518782. arXiv:astro-ph/0703239
Chevalier RA, Raymond JC (1978) Optical emission from a fast shock wave. The remnants of Tycho’s
supernova and SN 1006. Astrophys J 225:L27–L30. doi:10.1086/182785
Chevalier RA, Kirshner RP, Raymond JC (1980) The optical emission from a fast shock wave with appli-
cation to supernova remnants. Astrophys J 235:186–195. doi:10.1086/157623
DeMarco D, Blasi P, Stanev T (2007) Numerical propagation of high energy cosmic rays in the galaxy: I.
Technical issues. J Cosmol Astropart Phys 06:027. doi:10.1088/1475-7516/2007/06/027
Drury L (1983) On particle acceleration in supernova remnants. Space Sci Rev 36:57–60. doi:10.1007/
BF00171901


===== PAGE 69 =====

P. Blasi: The origin of galactic cosmic rays
Page 69 of 73
Drury LO (2011) Escaping the accelerator: how, when and in what numbers do cosmic rays get out of su-
pernova remnants? Mon Not R Astron Soc 415:1807–1814. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2966.2011.18824.x.
arXiv:1009.4799
Drury LO, Voelk JH (1981) Hydromagnetic shock structure in the presence of cosmic rays. Astrophys J
248:344–351. doi:10.1086/159159
Effenberger F, Fichtner H, Scherer K, Büsching I (2012) Anisotropic diffusion of galactic cos-
mic ray protons and their steady-state azimuthal distribution. Astron Astrophys 547:120.
doi:10.1051/0004-6361/201220203
Ellison DC, Eichler D (1984) Monte Carlo shock-like solutions to the Boltzmann equation with collective
scattering. Astrophys J 286:691–701. doi:10.1086/162644
Ellison DC, Drury LO, Meyer JP (1997) Galactic cosmic rays from supernova remnants. II. Shock accel-
eration of gas and dust. Astrophys J 487:197. doi:10.1086/304580
Ellison DC, Patnaude DJ, Slane P, Blasi P, Gabici S (2007) Particle acceleration in supernova remnants and
the production of thermal and nonthermal radiation. Astrophys J 661:879–891. doi:10.1086/517518.
arXiv:astro-ph/0702674
Ellison DC, Patnaude DJ, Slane P, Raymond J (2010) Efﬁcient cosmic ray acceleration, hydrodynamics,
and self-consistent thermal x-ray emission applied to supernova remnant RX J1713.7-3946. Astro-
phys J 712:287–293. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/712/1/287. arXiv:1001.1932
Fermi E (1949) On the origin of the cosmic radiation. Phys Rev 75:1169–1174. doi:10.1103/PhysRev.
75.1169
Fermi E (1954) Galactic magnetic ﬁelds and the origin of cosmic radiation. Astrophys J 119:1.
doi:10.1086/145789
Fukui Y, Sano H, Sato J, Torii K, Horachi H, Hayakawa T, McClure-Grifﬁths NM, Rowell G, Inoue
T, Inutsuka S, Kawamura A, Yamamoto H, Okuda T, Mizuno N, Onishi T, Mizuno A, Ogawa H
(2012) A detailed study of the molecular and atomic gas toward the γ -ray supernova remnant RX
J1713.7-3946: spatial TeV γ -ray and interstellar medium gas correspondence. Astrophys J 746:82.
doi:10.1088/0004-637X/746/1/82. arXiv:1107.0508
Gabici S, Aharonian FA, Blasi P (2007) Gamma rays from molecular clouds. Astrophys J Suppl Ser
309:365–371. doi:10.1007/s10509-007-9427-6. arXiv:astro-ph/0610032
Gabici S, Aharonian FA, Casanova S (2009) Broad-band non-thermal emission from molecular clouds
illuminated by cosmic rays from nearby supernova remnants. Mon Not R Astron Soc 396:1629–
1639. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2966.2009.14832.x. arXiv:0901.4549
Gaisser TK, Stanev T, Tilav S (2013) Cosmic ray energy spectrum from measurements of air showers.
arXiv:1303.3565v1
Gargaté L, Spitkovsky A (2012) Ion acceleration in non-relativistic astrophysical shocks. Astrophys J
744:67. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/744/1/67. arXiv:1107.0762
Ghavamian P, Raymond J, Hartigan P, Blair WP (2000) Evidence for shock precursors in Tycho’s super-
nova remnant. Astrophys J 535:266–274. doi:10.1086/308811
Ghavamian P, Laming JM, Rakowski CE (2007) A physical relationship between electron–proton tem-
perature equilibration and Mach number in fast collisionless shocks. Astrophys J 654:L69–L72.
doi:10.1086/510740. arXiv:astro-ph/0611306
Ghavamian P, Schwartz SJ, Mitchell J, Masters A, Laming JM (2013) Electron-ion temperature equi-
libration in collisionless shocks: the supernova remnant-solar wind connection. Space Sci Rev.
doi:10.1007/s11214-013-9999-0. arXiv:1305.6617
Giacalone J (2005) Particle acceleration at shocks moving through an irregular magnetic ﬁeld. Astrophys
J 624:765–772. doi:10.1086/429265
Giacalone J (2013) Cosmic-ray transport and interaction with shocks. Space Sci Rev 176:73–88.
doi:10.1007/s11214-011-9763-2
Giacalone J, Jokipii JR (2007) Magnetic ﬁeld ampliﬁcation by shocks in turbulent ﬂuids. Astrophys J
663:L41. doi:10.1086/519994
Giacinti G, Kachelrieß M, Semikoz DV (2013) Anisotropic cosmic ray diffusion and its implica-
tions for gamma-ray astronomy. Phys Rev D 88(2):023010. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.88.023010.
arXiv:1306.3209
Gieseler UDJ, Jones TW, Kang H (2000) Time dependent cosmic-ray shock acceleration with self-
consistent injection. Astron Astrophys 364:911–922. arXiv:astro-ph/0011058
Ginzburg VL, Syrovatsky SI (1961) Origin of cosmic rays. Prog Theor Phys Suppl 20:1. doi:10.1143/
PTPS.20.1


===== PAGE 70 =====

Page 70 of 73
Astron Astrophys Rev (2013) 21:70
Giordano F, Naumann-Godo M, Ballet J, Bechtol K, Funk S, Lande J, Mazziotta MN, Rainò S, Tanaka T,
Tibolla O, Uchiyama Y (2012) Fermi large area telescope detection of the young supernova remnant
Tycho. Astrophys J 744:L2. doi:10.1088/2041-8205/744/1/L2. arXiv:1108.0265
Giuliani A, Tavani M, Bulgarelli A, Striani E, Sabatini S, Cardillo M, Fukui Y, Kawamura A, Ohama
A, Furukawa N, Torii K, Sano H, Aharonian FA, Verrecchia F, Argan A, Barbiellini G, Caraveo
PA, Cattaneo PW, Chen AW, Cocco V, Costa E, D’Ammando F, Del Monte E, Paris G, Di Cocco
G, Donnarumma I, Evangelista Y, Feroci M, Fiorini M, Froysland T, Fuschino F, Galli M, Gianotti
F, Labanti C, Lapshov Y, Lazzarotto F, Lipari P, Longo F, Marisaldi M, Mereghetti S, Morselli A,
Moretti E, Pacciani L, Pellizzoni A, Perotti F, Picozza P, Pilia M, Prest M, Pucella G, Rapisarda
M, Rappoldi A, Sofﬁtta P, Trifoglio M, Trois A, Vallazza E, Vercellone S, Vittorini V, Zambra A,
Zanello D, Pittori C, Santolamazza P, Giommi P, Colafrancesco S (2010) AGILE detection of GeV
γ -ray emission from the SNR W28. Astron Astrophys 516:L11. doi:10.1051/0004-6361/201014256.
arXiv:1005.0784
Giuliani A, Cardillo M, Tavani M, Fukui Y, Yoshiike S, Torii K, Dubner G, Castelletti G, Barbiellini G,
Bulgarelli A, Caraveo P, Costa E, Cattaneo PW, Chen A, Contessi T, Del Monte E, Donnarumma I,
Evangelista Y, Feroci M, Gianotti F, Lazzarotto F, Lucarelli F, Longo F, Marisaldi M, Mereghetti S,
Pacciani L, Pellizzoni A, Piano G, Picozza P, Pittori C, Pucella G, Rapisarda M, Rappoldi A, Sabatini
S, Sofﬁtta P, Striani E, Trifoglio M, Trois A, Vercellone S, Verrecchia F, Vittorini V, Colafrancesco
S, Giommi P, Bignami G (2011) Neutral pion emission from accelerated protons in the supernova
remnant W44. Astrophys J 742:L30. doi:10.1088/2041-8205/742/2/L30. arXiv:1111.4868
Goldreich P, Sridhar S (1995) Toward a theory of interstellar turbulence. 2: Strong alfvenic turbulence.
Astrophys J 438:763. doi:10.1086/175121
Helder EA, Vink J, Bassa CG, Bamba A, Bleeker JAM, Funk S, Ghavamian P, Heyden KJVD, Verbunt
F, Yamazaki R (2009) Measuring the cosmic-ray acceleration efﬁciency of a supernova remnant.
Science 325:719. doi:10.1126/science.1173383
Helder EA, Kosenko D, Vink J (2010) Cosmic-ray acceleration efﬁciency versus temperature equilibration:
the case of SNR 0509-67.5. Astrophys J Lett 719:L140. doi:10.1088/2041-8205/719/2/L140
Helder EA, Kosenko D, Vink J (2011) Erratum: “Cosmic-ray acceleration efﬁciency versus temperature
equilibration: the case of SNR 0509-67.5”. Astrophys J Lett 737:L46. doi:10.1088/2041-8205/737/
2/L46
Helder EA, Vink J, Bamba A, Bleeker JAM, Burrows DN, Ghavamian P, Yamazaki R (2013) Proper
motions of H-alpha ﬁlaments in the supernova remnant RCW 86. arXiv:1306.3994
Heng K (2010) Balmer-dominated shocks: a concise review. Publ Astron Soc Aust 27:23–44. doi:10.1071/
AS09057. arXiv:0908.4080
Hewitt JW, Yusef-Zadeh F, Wardle M (2009) Correlation of supernova remnant Masers and gamma-ray
sources. Astrophys J 706:L270–L274. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/706/2/L270. arXiv:0909.2827
Higdon JC, Lingenfelter RE (2005) Ob associations, supernova-generated superbubbles, and the source of
cosmic rays. Astrophys J 628:738. doi:10.1086/430814
Higdon JC, Lingenfelter RE (2006) The superbubble origin for galactic cosmic rays. Adv Space Res
37:1913. doi:10.1016/j.asr.2005.07.071
Higdon JC, Lingenfelter RE (2013) The galactic spatial distribution of ob associations and their surround-
ing supernova-generated superbubble. arXiv:1302.1223v1
Holder J (2012) TeV gamma-ray astronomy: a summary. Astropart Phys 39:61–75. doi:10.1016/j.
astropartphys.2012.02.014. arXiv:1204.1267
Höorandel JR (2006) A review of experimental results at the knee. J Phys Conf Ser 47:41–50.
doi:10.1088/1742-6596/47/1/005. arXiv:astro-ph/0508014
Hörandel JR (2004) Models of the knee in the energy spectrum of cosmic rays. Astropart Phys 21:241.
doi:10.1016/j.astropartphys.2004.01.004
Aartsen MG et al (ICETOP Collaboration) (2013) Measurement of the cosmic ray energy spectrum with
icetop-73. Phys Rev D 88:042004
Jokipii JR (1982) Particle drift, diffusion, and acceleration at shocks. Astrophys J 255:716.
doi:10.1086/159870
Jokipii JR (1987) Rate of energy gain and maximum energy in diffusive shock acceleration. Astrophys J
313:842. doi:10.1086/165022
Jokipii JR, Parker EN (1969a) Cosmic-ray life and the stochastic nature of the galactic magnetic ﬁeld.
Astrophys J 155:799. doi:10.1086/149910
Jokipii JR, Parker EN (1969b) Stochastic aspects of magnetic lines of force with application to cosmic-ray
propagation. Astrophys J 155:777. doi:10.1086/149909


===== PAGE 71 =====

P. Blasi: The origin of galactic cosmic rays
Page 71 of 73
Juliusson E, Meyer P, Müller D (1972) Composition of cosmic-ray nuclei at high energies. Phys Rev Lett
29:445–448. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.29.445
Knerr JM, Jokipii JR, Ellison DC (1996) A dynamical Monte Carlo simulation of a collisionless shock.
Astrophys J 458:641. doi:10.1086/176846
Krymskii GF (1977) A regular mechanism for the acceleration of charged particles on the front of a shock
wave. Dokl Akad Nauk SSSR 234:1306–1308
Lagage PO, Cesarsky CJ (1983a) Cosmic-ray shock acceleration in the presence of self-excited waves.
Astron Astrophys 118:223
Lagage PO, Cesarsky CJ (1983b) The maximum energy of cosmic rays accelerated by supernova shocks.
Astron Astrophys 125:249
Lucek SG, Bell AR (2000) Non-linear ampliﬁcation of a magnetic ﬁeld driven by cosmic ray streaming.
Mon Not R Astron Soc 314:65–74. doi:10.1046/j.1365-8711.2000.03363.x
Maestro P, Ahn HS, Allison P, Bagliesi MG, Barbier L, Beatty JJ, Bigongiari G, Brandt TJ, Childers JT,
Conklin NB, Coutu S, DuVernois MA, Ganel O, Han JH, Jeon JA, Kim KC, Lee MH, Malinine
A, Marrocchesi PS, Minnick S, Mognet SI, Nam SW, Nutter S, Park IH, Park NH, Seo ES, Sina
R, Walpole P, Yang J, Yoon YS, Zei R, Zinn SY (2010) Elemental energy spectra of cosmic rays
measured by cream-II. arXiv:1003.5759v1
Malkov M, Drury L (2001) Nonlinear theory of diffusive acceleration of particles by shock waves. Rep
Prog Phys 64:429
Malkov MA (1997) Analytic solution for nonlinear shock acceleration in the Bohm limit. Astrophys J
485:638. doi:10.1086/304471. arXiv:astro-ph/9707152
Malkov MA (1998) Ion leakage from quasiparallel collisionless shocks: implications for injection
and shock dissipation. Phys Rev E 58:4911–4928. doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.58.4911. arXiv:astro-ph/
9806340
Malkov MA (1999) Asymptotic particle spectra and plasma ﬂows at strong shocks. Astrophys J 511:L53–
L56. doi:10.1086/311825. arXiv:astro-ph/9807097
Malkov MA, Diamond PH, Sagdeev RZ, Aharonian FA, Moskalenko IV (2013) Analytic solution for
self-regulated collective escape of cosmic rays from their acceleration sites. Astrophys J 768:73.
doi:10.1088/0004-637X/768/1/73. arXiv:1207.4728
Matthaeus WH, Qin G, Bieber JW, Zank GP (2003) Nonlinear collisionless perpendicular diffusion of
charged particles. Astrophys J 590:L53–L56. doi:10.1086/376613
Maurin D, Melot F, Taillet R (2013) A database of charged cosmic rays. arXiv:1302.5525
McKee CF, Truelove JK (1995) Explosions in the interstellar medium. Phys Rep 256:157–172.
doi:10.1016/0370-1573(94)00106-D
Meyer JP, Drury LO, Ellison DC (1997) Galactic cosmic rays from supernova remnants. I.
A cosmic-ray composition controlled by volatility and mass-to-charge ratio. Astrophys J 487:182.
doi:10.1086/304599
Morlino G, Caprioli D (2011) Strong evidences of hadron acceleration in Tycho’s supernova remnant.
arXiv:1105.6342v2
Morlino G, Caprioli D (2012) Strong evidence for hadron acceleration in Tycho’s supernova remnant.
Astron Astrophys 538:81. doi:10.1051/0004-6361/201117855
Morlino G, Amato E, Blasi P (2009) Gamma-ray emission from SNR RX J1713.7–3946 and the ori-
gin of galactic cosmic rays. Mon Not R Astron Soc 392(1):240–250. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2966.2008.
14033.x
Morlino G, Bandiera R, Blasi P, Amato E (2012) Collisionless shocks in a partially ionized medium. II.
Balmer emission. Astrophys J 760:137. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/760/2/137
Morlino G, Blasi P, Bandiera R, Amato E (2013a) Broad Balmer line emission and cosmic ray acceleration
efﬁciency in supernova remnant shocks. Astron Astrophys 558:A25, 6 pp
Morlino G, Blasi P, Bandiera R, Amato E (2013b) Cosmic Ray acceleration and Balmer emission from
SNR 0509-67.5. Astron Astrophys 557:A142, 7 pp
Morlino G, Blasi P, Bandiera R, Amato E, Caprioli D (2013c) Collisionless shocks in a partially ionized
medium. III. Efﬁcient cosmic ray acceleration. Astrophys J 768:148. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/768/
2/148. arXiv:1211.6148
Nava L, Gabici S (2013) Anisotropic cosmic ray diffusion and gamma-ray production close to supernova
remnants, with an application to w28. Mon Not R Astron Soc 429:1643. doi:10.1093/mnras/sts450
Nikoli´c S, van de Ven G, Heng K, Kupko D, Husemann B, Raymond JC, Hughes JP, Falcón-Barroso
J (2013) An integral view of fast shocks around supernova 1006. doi:10.1126/science.1228297.
arXiv:1302.4328v1


===== PAGE 72 =====

Page 72 of 73
Astron Astrophys Rev (2013) 21:70
Parizot E, Marcowith A, van der Swaluw E, Bykov AM, Tatischeff V (2004) Superbubbles and energetic
particles in the Galaxy. I. Collective effects of particle acceleration. Astron Astrophys 424:747–760.
doi:10.1051/0004-6361:20041269. arXiv:astro-ph/0405531
Potgieter M (2013) Solar modulation of cosmic rays. Living Rev Sol Phys 10:3. doi:10.12942/lrsp-2013-3.
arXiv:1306.4421
Ptuskin V (2006) Cosmic ray transport in the galaxy. J Phys Conf Ser 47:113. doi:10.1088/1742-6596/
47/1/014
Ptuskin V, Zirakashvili V, Seo ES (2010) Spectrum of galactic cosmic rays accelerated in supernova rem-
nants. Astrophys J 718:31. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/718/1/31
Reville B, Bell AR (2012) A ﬁlamentation instability for streaming cosmic rays. Mon Not R Astron Soc
419:2433–2440. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2966.2011.19892.x. arXiv:1109.5690
Reville B, Bell AR (2013) Universal behaviour of shock precursors in the presence of efﬁcient cosmic ray
acceleration. Mon Not R Astron Soc 430:2873–2884. doi:10.1093/mnras/stt100. arXiv:1301.3173
Riquelme MA, Spitkovsky A (2009) Nonlinear study of Bell’s cosmic ray current-driven instability. As-
trophys J 694:626–642. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/694/1/626. arXiv:0810.4565
Rodriguez Marrero AY, de Torres DF, Cea del Pozo E, Reimer O, Cillis AN (2008) Diffusion of cosmic
rays and the gamma-ray large area telescope: phenomenology at the 1–100 GeV regime. Astrophys J
689:213–218. arXiv:0808.1834. doi:10.1086/592562
Rossi B (1964) Cosmic rays. McGraw-Hill paperbacks in physics. McGraw-Hill, New York. http://books.
google.it/books?id=K6kRAQAAIAAJ
Sano T, Nishihara K, Matsuoka C, Inoue T (2012) Magnetic ﬁeld ampliﬁcation associated with
the Richtmyer–Meshkov instability. Astrophys J 758:126. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/758/2/126.
arXiv:1209.0961
Schure KM, Bell AR (2013) Cosmic ray acceleration in young supernova remnants. arXiv:1307.6575v1
Schure KM, Bell AR, Drury LO, Bykov AM (2012) Diffusive shock acceleration and magnetic ﬁeld am-
pliﬁcation. Space Sci Rev 173:491. doi:10.1007/s11214-012-9871-7
Serpico PD (2012) Astrophysical models for the origin of the positron “excess”. Astropart Phys 39:2–11.
doi:10.1016/j.astropartphys.2011.08.007. arXiv:1108.4827
Shalchi A, Büsching I, Lazarian A, Schlickeiser R (2010) Perpendicular diffusion of cosmic rays for a
Goldreich–Sridhar spectrum. Astrophys J 725:2117. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/725/2/2117
Simpson JA, Garcia-Munoz M (1988) Cosmic-ray lifetime in the galaxy—experimental results and mod-
els. Space Sci Rev 46:205. doi:10.1007/BF00212240
Sironi L, Spitkovsky A (2011) Particle acceleration in relativistic magnetized collisionless electron-ion
shocks. Astrophys J 726:75. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/726/2/75. arXiv:1009.0024
Skilling J (1975a) Cosmic ray streaming. I. Effect of Alfven waves on particles. Mon Not R Astron Soc
172:557
Skilling J (1975b) Cosmic ray streaming. II. Effect of particles on Alfven waves. Mon Not R Astron Soc
173:245
Sokolsky P (2013) Results from the telescope array and review of HiRes. In: European physical journal
web of conferences, vol 52, p 6002. doi:10.1051/epjconf/20125206002
Sokolsky P, Thomson GB (2007) Topical review: Highest energy cosmic-rays and results from the HiRes
experiment. J Phys G, Nucl Part Phys 34:401. doi:10.1088/0954-3899/34/11/R01. arXiv:0706.1248
Sollerman J, Ghavamian P, Lundqvist P, Smith RC (2003) High resolution spectroscopy of Balmer-
dominated shocks in the RCW 86, Kepler and SN 1006 supernova remnants. Astron Astrophys
407:249. doi:10.1051/0004-6361:20030839
Spitkovsky A (2008a) On the structure of relativistic collisionless shocks in electron-ion plasmas. Astro-
phys J 673:L39–L42. doi:10.1086/527374. arXiv:0706.3126
Spitkovsky A (2008b) Particle acceleration in relativistic collisionless shocks: Fermi process at last? As-
trophys J 682:L5–L8. doi:10.1086/590248. arXiv:0802.3216
Spitzer L (1962) Physics of fully ionized gases. Wiley, New York
Tavani M, Giuliani A, Chen AW, Argan A, Barbiellini G, Bulgarelli A, Caraveo P, Cattaneo PW, Cocco V,
Contessi T, D’ammando F, Costa E, Paris GD, Monte ED, Cocco GD, Donnarumma I, Evangelista
Y, Ferrari A, Feroci M, Fuschino F, Galli M, Gianotti F, Labanti C, Lapshov I, Lazzarotto F, Lipari P,
Longo F, Marisaldi M, Mastropietro M, Mereghetti S, Morelli E, Moretti E, Morselli A, Pacciani L,
Pellizzoni A, Perotti F, Piano G, Picozza P, Pilia M, Pucella G, Prest M, Rapisarda M, Rappoldi A,
Scalise E, Rubini A, Sabatini S, Striani E, Sofﬁtta P, Trifoglio M, Trois A, Vallazza E, Vercellone S,
Vittorini V, Zambra A, Zanello D, Pittori C, Verrecchia F, Santolamazza P, Giommi P, Colafrancesco


===== PAGE 73 =====

P. Blasi: The origin of galactic cosmic rays
Page 73 of 73
S, Antonelli LA, Salotti L (2010) Direct evidence for hadronic cosmic-ray acceleration in the super-
nova remnant IC 443. Astrophys J Lett 710:L151. doi:10.1088/2041-8205/710/2/L151
Thoudam S, Hörandel JR (2012) Nearby supernova remnants and the cosmic ray spectral hardening
at high energies. Mon Not R Astron Soc 421:1209–1214. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2966.2011.20385.x.
arXiv:1112.3020
Thoudam S, Hörandel JR (2013) Revisiting the hardening of the cosmic-ray energy spectrum at TeV
energies. arXiv:1304.1400
Tomassetti N (2012) Origin of the cosmic-ray spectral hardening. Astrophys J Lett 752(1):L13, 5 pp
Treumann RA (2009) Fundamentals of collisionless shocks for astrophysical application. 1. Non-
relativistic shocks. Astron Astrophys Rev 17:409. doi:10.1007/s00159-009-0024-2
Uchiyama Y, Takahashi T, Aharonian FA (2002) Flat spectrum X-ray emission from the direction of
a molecular cloud associated with SNR RX J1713.7-3946. Publ Astron Soc Jpn 54:L73–L77.
arXiv:astro-ph/0208049
van Adelsberg M, Heng K, McCray R, Raymond JC (2008) Spatial structure and collisionless
electron heating in Balmer-dominated shocks. Astrophys J 689:1089–1104. doi:10.1086/592680.
arXiv:0803.2521
Vink J (2012) Supernova remnants: the x-ray perspective. Astron Astrophys Rev 20:49. doi:10.1007/
s00159-011-0049-1
Vladimirov AE, Bykov AM, Ellison DC (2008) Turbulence dissipation and particle injection in non-
linear diffusive shock acceleration with magnetic ﬁeld ampliﬁcation. Astrophys J 688:1084–1101.
doi:10.1086/592240. arXiv:0807.1321
Völk HJ, Berezhko EG, Ksenofontov LT (2005) Magnetic ﬁeld ampliﬁcation in Tycho and other shell-type
supernova remnants. Astron Astrophys 433:229. doi:10.1051/0004-6361:20042015
Warren JS, Hughes JP, Badenes C, Ghavamian P, McKee CF, Moffett D, Plucinsky PP, Rakowski C,
Reynoso E, Slane P (2005) Cosmic-ray acceleration at the forward shock in Tycho’s supernova rem-
nant: evidence from Chandra X-ray observations. Astrophys J 634:376–389. doi:10.1086/496941.
arXiv:astro-ph/0507478
Zirakashvili VN, Ptuskin VS (2012) Numerical simulations of diffusive shock acceleration in SNRs. As-
tropart Phys 39:12–21. doi:10.1016/j.astropartphys.2011.09.003. arXiv:1109.4482
Zirakashvili VN, Ptuskin VS, Völk HJ (2008) Modeling Bell’s nonresonant cosmic-ray instability. Astro-
phys J 678:255–261. doi:10.1086/529579. arXiv:0801.4486
Zweibel EG (1979) Energetic particle trapping by Alfven wave instabilities. In: Proceedings of the work-
shop on particle acceleration mechanisms in astrophysics, vol 56, p 319. doi:10.1063/1.32090
Zweibel EG, Everett JE (2010) Environments for magnetic ﬁeld ampliﬁcation by cosmic rays. Astrophys
J 709:1412. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/709/2/1412
