

===== PAGE 1 =====

October 9, 2018
14:54
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Amato
International Journal of Modern Physics: Conference Series
c⃝World Scientiﬁc Publishing Company
THE ORIGIN OF GALACTIC COSMIC RAYS
ELENA AMATO
INAF - Osservatorio Astroﬁsico di Arcetri, Largo E. Fermi, 5, I-50125, Firenze, Italy
amato@arcetri.astro.it
Received
Revised
Initial discovery of CRs dates back to a century ago (1912). Their identiﬁcation as
particles rather than radiation dates to about 20 years later and in 20 more years also the
ﬁrst suggestion that they were associated with SNRs was in place. The basic mechanism
behind their acceleration was suggested almost 40 years ago. Much work has been done
since then to the aim of proving that both the acceleration mechanism and site are
well understood, but no deﬁnite proof has been obtained: in spite of impressive progress
of both theory and observations, the evidence in support of the commonly accepted
interpretation is only circumstantial. In the following I will try to make the point on
where we stand in terms of how our theories confront with data: I will review recent
progress on the subject and try to point to avenues to pursue in order to gather new
proofs, if not smoking gun evidence of the origin of Galactic Cosmic Rays.
Keywords: ISM: supernova remnants; MHD; acceleration of particles;
PACS numbers: 98.38.Mz,98.38.Fs,96.50.Pw
1. Introduction
At the beginning of last century, an outstanding mystery was associated with the
inexplicable rate of discharge of electroscopes, which required some source of ion-
izing radiation to be explained. In 1912, the Austrian scientist Viktor Hess showed
that this radiation was of extraterrestrial origin, by carrying electrometers on bal-
loon ﬂights and ﬁnding that the rate of discharge was increasing with height. A
similar conclusion had already been reached the year before by the italian scientist
Domenico Pacini1, who had carried electrometers on a submarine, showing that the
radiation intensity decreased with increasing depth under the sea. This latter studies
remained however poorly known and the paternity of the discovery was attributed
to Viktor Hess who was awarded the Nobel Prize for it in 1936.
The term “Cosmic Rays” was then coined by Robert Millikan who believed that
the unknown ionizing radiation was made of photons, rather than matter. Millikan
kept this belief until his death, even after compelling evidence of the contrary had
been gathered, and the Cosmic Rays have kept this name, in spite of not being rays.
In the early ’30s an association between Cosmic Rays (CRs hereafter) and Su-
pernova (SN) explosions was proposed for the ﬁrst time2. The proposal was based
1
arXiv:1406.7714v1  [astro-ph.HE]  30 Jun 2014


===== PAGE 2 =====

October 9, 2018
14:54
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Amato
2
Elena Amato
on an energetic argument3: the energy density of CRs (∼3×1040erg s−1) could eas-
ily be supplied by SNe if 10% of the explosion energy were turned into accelerated
particles (this is assuming an energy release of 1051erg per SN event and a rate of
1/100 yr−1 in the Galaxy). A quantitative proposal for how this energy conversion
would take place had to wait until the late ’70s when a number of scientists4,5,6,7 in-
dependently suggested that the process of diﬀusive shock acceleration (also known
as “1st order Fermi mechanism”) taking place at the blast wave launched by a
Supernova explosion could provide the required conversion mechanism.
The idea that Supernova Remnant (SNR) shocks are the primary sites of CR
acceleration in the Galaxy is what is generally referred to as ”Supernova remnant
paradigm for the origin of Cosmic Rays”. This paradigm has been under scrutiny
now for about 50 years, but only in the last few years some clear evidence in its
favour has been found.
The CR spectrum, reported in Fig. 1, has been traditionally described as a single
power-law for several decades in energy, between ∼30 GeV and ∼5×1015 eV. Below
30 GeV the spectrum bends as a consequence of solar modulation (the Sun magnetic
ﬁeld partially screens Earth from CRs), while at PeV energies a steepening appears,
the so-called knee. At this energy, the CR energy spectrum (number of particles per
unit energy interval), changes from ∝E−2.7 to ∝E−3.1, and this steepening seems
to be accompanied by a change in composition, with the latter becoming heavier.
Current data suggest that the knee can be easily interpreted if the CR acceleration
mechanism in our Galaxy is rigidity dependent and the maximum energy protons
can reach is ∼5×1015 eV. Then heavier nuclei would reach Z times larger energies,
with Z the charge of the nucleus. In this scheme, the heaviest nuclei, namely Fe
nuclei, could reach an energy 26 times larger than protons, and the knee would
result as the superposition of the cut-oﬀs of diﬀerent species.
If the knee marks the end of the Galactic proton spectrum, then galactic sources
must be able to provide acceleration up to that energy. As will be discussed in
more detail later on in this review, if SNRs are the main sources of CRs, eﬀective
ampliﬁcation of the interstellar magnetic ﬁeld must take place. The last generation
of X-ray telescopes, with their superb spatial resolution, have not only conﬁrmed
the presence in SNRs of electrons with TeV energies, but have also ﬁnally allowed to
highlight the presence of ampliﬁed magnetic ﬁelds in these sources, likely associated
with eﬃcient acceleration of hadrons9,10. Also suggestive of eﬃcient acceleration of
protons is the measurement of anomalous widths of Balmer lines in some Hα bright
remnants11,12. Finally, in very recent times, the impressive advances in gamma-
ray astronomy have led, for the ﬁrst time, to direct observational evidence of the
presence of mildly relativistic protons in a few SNRs interacting with molecular
clouds13,14.
This fundamental progress deriving from observations of SNRs has been paral-
leled by discoveries coming from direct observation of CRs. The latter have touched
both the hadronic and leptonic component of CRs. As far as nuclei are concerned,


===== PAGE 3 =====

October 9, 2018
14:54
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Amato
The origin of Galactic Cosmic Rays
3
Fig. 1.
Measured spectrum of Cosmic Rays from Ref. 8.
the paradigm of a featureless spectrum at energies below the knee has been dis-
claimed by balloon and satellite observations15,16 showing a spectral hardening of
all species at around 200 GeV/nucleon and a diﬀerent spectrum for the two most
abundant species, protons and He nuclei, with the latter being systematically ﬂat-
ter. These features might be revealing us important clues on the process behind
particle acceleration and propagation in the Galaxy.
As for the leptons, a discovery that has been followed by much interest and
excitement is that of a rising fraction of positrons versus electrons at energies above
a few GeV17. Such a behaviour is not expected unless a source of primary positrons
comes into play, and the debate immediately got heated up about the nature of


===== PAGE 4 =====

October 9, 2018
14:54
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Amato
4
Elena Amato
this source, in principle either a class of astrophysical objects or a particle physics
process related to dark matter.
At the same time, important progress has been made in terms of the theory that
is relevant to explain all the above mentioned phenomena. Comparison between
recent theoretical progress and new observations will be the main subject of this
review. The literature is vast and the list of references given here is not at all
exhaustive. Discussion of other aspects of the subject and more references can be
found in other excellent recent reviews, such as Refs. 8and 18.
In Sec. 2 and 3 I will review our current description of CR acceleration at SNR
shocks. I will describe the main features of Fermi I mechanism when it operates in
conditions of eﬃcient particle acceleration, the so called non-linear diﬀusive shock
acceleration (NLDSA) regime. We will see that an essential feature for SNR shocks
to be able to accelerate particles up to the knee energy is eﬀective ampliﬁcation
of interstellar magnetic ﬁelds by a factor of 30-100 (Sec. 3.1) and we will work
out the CR spectrum that SNRs are expected to release in the ISM (Sec. 3.2). In
Sec. 4 we will see how the basic theoretical predictions compare with observations:
the comparison will be successful in many respects but we will also ﬁnd a few
discrepancies in the light of recent γ-ray observations of SNRs and of new insight
on the CR spectra that must be injected in the Galaxy. In Sec. 6 I will illustrate
how the basic theory can be revised to overcome the discrepancies and in Sec. 7 I
will discuss further revisions that are prompted by new insights in the process of
magnetic ﬁeld ampliﬁcation.
In the ﬁnal part of this review I will discuss some exciting developments
prompted by recent observations. In Sec. 8 I will illustrate the recent progress made
in the description of shocks propagating in a partially ionized medium and the po-
tential to gather direct information on CR acceleration from optical observations
of Balmer dominated SNRs. Finally, in Sec. 9 I will discuss two major recent dis-
coveries coming from direct observations of Galactic CRs, namely the presence of a
hardening in the spectra of protons and He nuclei at an energy of about 200 GeV,
and the rise with energy of the fraction of positrons in the leptonic CR component
at energies above 30 GeV. I will conclude in Sec. 10.
2. The acceleration mechanism
The most commonly invoked particle acceleration mechanism in Astrophysics is
diﬀusive shock acceleration, also known as Fermi I process. Fermi19,20 initially en-
visioned a mechanism, later named Fermi II acceleration process, able to explain
energy transfer from magnetized clouds to individual particles. The original idea
was as follows: energetic particles are scattered by magnetic irregularities; in an in-
teraction with a magnetized cloud the particle changes its direction of motion and
gains or loses energy depending on whether the collision is head-on or tail-on; after
averaging over many particle-cloud interactions, thanks to the fact that the head-on
collisions turn out to be slightly more numerous, the process leads to a net energy


===== PAGE 5 =====

October 9, 2018
14:54
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Amato
The origin of Galactic Cosmic Rays
5
gain ∼(∆E/E) = (4/3)(V/c)2, where V is the velocity of the clouds and c is the
speed of light. Since the velocity of the cloud, or of the magnetic perturbation, is
generally V ≪c, in this formulation the acceleration turns out to be very slow.
Things change dramatically, however, when the same process is considered in the
context of a shock: the velocity of magnetic irregularities, which serve as scattering
centres for particles, is negligible with respect to the ﬂuid velocity on both sides of
the shock. This implies that the scattering centres can be considered at rest with
the ﬂuid both upstream and downstream. In the shock system, whether a particle
moves from upstream to downstream or viceversa, it always sees the ﬂuid on the
other side of the shock as approaching. Therefore, each time an energetic particle
crosses the shock, it always suﬀers head on collisions with scatterers on the other
side of the shock, thus gaining energy much faster: (∆E/E) ∝(VS/c), where VS
is now the shock velocity (which is also much higher than the typical velocity of
magnetic perturbations in the Galaxy). The fact that the energy gain is now linear
in the velocity ratio is what gave origin to the designation “Fermi I”, as opposed to
“Fermi II”, used to indicate the stochastic acceleration process in which the gain is
second order in V/c.
A very attractive feature of Fermi I mechanism is the fact that in the context of a
strong shock it gives rise to a particle spectrum which is a power law in momentum
with a universal slope, close to what implied from CR observations. In general the
spectrum of shock accelerated particles will be given by N(p) ∝p−γp, where N(p)
is the number of particles per unit momentum interval and
γp = 3RT /(RT −1) ,
(1)
with RT the compression ratio of the shock, namely RT = u1/u2 with u1 and
u2 the ﬂuid velocities upstream and downstream of the shock respectively. The
compression factor r only depends on the shock Mach number Ms = u1/cs1 where
cs1 ≈10√T4km/s is the sound speed in the Interstellar Medium (ISM), whose
temperature has been expressed in units of 104 K. Using the standard Rankine-
Hugoniot relations to describe the jump of all thermodynamical quantities at the
shock, one ﬁnds:
RT =
4M 2
s
3 + M 2s
.
(2)
For strong shocks, namely Ms ≫1, this ratio is RT ≈4 and hence γp = 4. For
relativistic particles (E ≫mc2), this slope in momentum is equivalent to a slope
in energy γe that is easily calculated using the fact that E−γedE = 4πp2p−γpdp.
The result is γe = 2, which is exactly what required to explain the CR spectrum
at energies below the knee, if propagation eﬀects (to be discussed later) lead to a
steepening by ∼0.7. The spectral index will be γe > 2 for weaker shocks.
A noticeable feature of this process is that the particle spectrum is completely
insensitive to the scattering properties. This is because the probability for particles
to return to the shock is unaﬀected by scattering. What does depend on scattering,


===== PAGE 6 =====

October 9, 2018
14:54
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Amato
6
Elena Amato
however, is the time it takes for the particles to get back to the shock, and hence
the maximum number of crossings a particle can undergo during the life-time of
the system, or before being aﬀected by energy losses: in other words, the maximum
achievable energy. In the diﬀusive regime, the time it takes for a particle to complete
a cycle around the shock is21:
tacc =
3
u1 −u2
D1
u1
+ D2
u2

(3)
where D1 and D2 are the diﬀusion coeﬃcients upstream and downstream of the
shock, which depend on the particle energy and on the level of magnetic turbu-
lence. The maximum achievable energy is then determined by the condition that
the acceleration time be less than the age of the system and the timescale for losses:
tacc(EMax) = min (tage, tloss) .
(4)
While losses are usually not a concern for protons, the system lifetime turns out to
impose important constraints: SNR shocks remain eﬃcient accelerators only for a
relatively short time. Immediately after the SN explosion, the SN ejecta expand in
the ISM with a velocity which is almost constant and highly supersonic. During this
phase, the so-called free-expansion (but more properly ejecta-dominated) phase,
acceleration is expected to be eﬀective. After some time, however, the mass of
ISM that the shock sweeps up becomes comparable to the mass of the ejecta, and,
from that point on, the shock velocity starts to decrease. This happens at a time
TST = RST/Vej, where (1/2)MejV 2
ej = ESN and RST is deﬁned by the condition
(4/3)πρISMR3
ST = Mej. One ﬁnds:
TST = 200M 5/6
ej⊙E−1/2
51
n−1/3
1
yr ,
(5)
where E51 is the kinetic energy associated with the SN explosion in units of 1051 erg,
n1 is the ISM density in units of cm−3 and Mej⊙is the mass of the ejecta expressed
in units of solar masses. For typical values of the parameters the Sedov phase starts
after few hundred years.
How this time compares with the acceleration time of energetic particles obvi-
ously depends on their diﬀusion coeﬃcient (Eqs. 3 and 4). The latter can be worked
out in a simple analytic way in the quasi-linear approximation, namely under the
assumption that the perturbation δB responsible for scattering is weak: δB ≪B0,
where B0 is the regular ﬁeld. If one studies the motion of a particle in this situation,
one easily obtains that the particle scattering frequency is:
νs = π
4 Ω
*δBres
B0
2+
(6)
where δBres refers to the turbulent ﬁeld at the resonant wavelength, namely at
a wavelength equal to the particle Larmor radius rL. Before writing the particle
diﬀusion coeﬃcient parallel to the regular ﬁeld B0, as D = vλmfp/3, with v the


===== PAGE 7 =====

October 9, 2018
14:54
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Amato
The origin of Galactic Cosmic Rays
7
particle velocity and the mean free path λmfp = v/νs, let us introduce F(k), the
power per logarithmic bandwidth at wavenumber k, such that:
δB(k)
B0
2
=
Z k
0
dk′
k′ F(k)
and
δBres
B0
2
= F(1/rL) .
(7)
We then obtain for the diﬀusion coeﬃcient22, in the case of a relativistic particle
(v = c):
D∥(p) = c2
3νs
= 4
3π
 B0
δBres
2
crL
D⊥(p) =
 rL
λmfp
2
D∥= π
12
δBres
B0
2
crL
(8)
where ∥and ⊥are with respect to the direction of the unperturbed magnetic ﬁeld.
One immediately sees that perpendicular diﬀusion is faster the larger the level of
turbulence, while the opposite applies to parallel diﬀusion. These formulae are only
strictly applicable, however, for δB/B0 < 1, and for δB →B0 one has the so-called
Bohm diﬀusion limit, with the particle mean free path becoming as small as their
gyro radius:
D∥≈D⊥≈DB = 1
3crL .
(9)
Actually, determining the relative importance of parallel and perpendicular trans-
port is a much more complicated task than suggested by Eq. 8. This is due to the
fact that the latter is actually dominated by magnetic ﬁeld line wandering, which
combines in a non-trivial way with parallel diﬀusion23. It is still true, however,
that for small perturbations, one expects D⊥< D∥, and hence the most stringent
constraints on the maximum achievable energy will come from parallel diﬀusion.
Let us ﬁrst consider the case in which δB is just what can be expected assuming
that turbulence in the Galaxy is injected with δB/B0 ≈1 at a scale of Lout ∼50 −
100 pc and then develops a Kolmogorov spectrum at smaller scales. If δB ∼B0 at
the outer scale, then δB2
res = B2
0 (rL/Lout)2/3. As a result, the maximum achievable
energy at the Sedov time is EMax ∼a few GeV.
If instead, due to some other process, the ﬁeld is ampliﬁed up to a level δBres ≈
B0, then EMax ∼104 −105 GeV24, which is still a factor 30-100 short of the knee.
The conclusion one reaches is then that the magnetic ﬁeld in the vicinity of
Supernova shocks must be ampliﬁed by a large factor compared to the average
value in the ISM if SNRs are responsible of the acceleration of galactic CRs up
to the knee. On the other hand, if SNRs are the main factories of Galactic CRs,
another condition must also be true: of order 10% of the kinetic energy of the blast
wave must be converted into accelerated particles.This implies that the test-particle
description of the shock acceleration process is not appropriate and the dynamical
back reaction of the particles on the accelerators must be taken into account.


===== PAGE 8 =====

October 9, 2018
14:54
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Amato
8
Elena Amato
3. Non-linear Diﬀusive Shock Acceleration
The bottom line of the discussion in the previous section is that, if SNRs are the
primary sources of Galactic CRs, a correct description of the acceleration process
can only be achieved within the framework of Non-Linear Diﬀusive Shock Acceler-
ation (NLDSA hereafter) with Magnetic Field Ampliﬁcation (MFA hereafter). The
full theory has been built in the course of several years with the contribution of sev-
eral people and research groups using very diﬀerent approaches. Pioneering work
on the subject of CR modiﬁed shocks dates back to the early ’80s25 and was based
on two-ﬂuid models: the thermal plasma and the CRs were treated as two distinct
interacting ﬂuids; no magnetic ﬁeld ampliﬁcation was included and magnetic ﬁelds
played no dynamical role. Later on, in the early 90’s, numerical approaches to the
problem started to be developed, both ﬁnite diﬀerence schemes26,27,28 and Mon-
tecarlo simulations29,30,31. The numerical codes developed for this purpose have
evolved during the years and have been constantly upgraded to take into account
an increasing amount of physical processes, including now MFA32,33,34,35.
Also very fruitful have been the attempts at building a semi-analytical kinetic de-
scription of the system dynamics36,37,38,39. This kind of modelling has much evolved
during the years as well, and, in its present form40,41,42 it includes all three major
sources of non-linearity:
1) the dynamical eﬀect of the CR pressure on the shock
2) the wave generation by accelerated particles streaming upstream of the
shock
3) the dynamical reaction of the ampliﬁed magnetic ﬁeld on the system.
Before presenting the equations, it is probably useful to give a qualitative descrip-
tion of what happens. In case of eﬃcient acceleration, accelerated particles take on
a sizeable fraction of the energy that is being dissipated at the shock. Energetic par-
ticles have velocities much larger than the shock speed and large mean free paths:
they can propagate far from the shock in the upstream and carry with them infor-
mation about the presence of the shock. In terms of equations, this fact is expressed
by a CR related pressure term that is computed based on the transport equation
for accelerated particles. This CR pressure term (Pc in the following) is largest at
the shock location and progressively decreases far upstream from the shock, due to
the fact that progressively fewer particles can reach large distances. This is in turn
a consequence of the diﬀusive transport of particles: they diﬀuse further the larger
their energy (in all “normal” situations the diﬀusion coeﬃcient is an increasing
function of energy), and only the most energetic ones can reach very far upstream,
with Pc tending to zero at upstream inﬁnity. As a result of the conservation of total
momentum (and mass), a precursor then develops in the thermal plasma, namely a
region in which the ﬂuid progressively slows down while approaching the shock from
upstream inﬁnity, and at the same time its density increases. The shock develops
a proﬁle such as that represented in the right panel of Fig. 2. The velocity jump


===== PAGE 9 =====

October 9, 2018
14:54
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Amato
The origin of Galactic Cosmic Rays
9
Fig. 2.
Comparison between a shock that is not accelerating particles eﬃciently and one that
is, and develops a precursor. In the left panel the standard picture of a test-particle shock is
drawn: the ﬂuid undergoes an abrupt transition, slowing down and being compressed over a scale
comparable with the Larmor radius of thermal particles. In the right panel a sketch of a modiﬁed
shock is shown: the ﬂuid starts being slowed down and compressed over a scale comparable with
the diﬀusion path length of the highest energy particles. Further compression by a factor that is
always smaller than 4 occurs then on a scale comparable with the thermal particle Larmor radius,
and this is the so called subshock (grey shaded area).
between upstream inﬁnity and downstream is realised in two steps, with an initial
gradual decrease and then a real discontinuity (i.e. sudden variation of the ther-
modynamical quantities on a scale comparable with the Larmor radius of thermal
downstream particles) at the so called subshock (shaded area in the right panel of
Fig. 2). While the compression at the subshock (u1/u2) is now less than 4 even for a
large Mach number shock, the overall compression ratio, u0/u2, is now potentially
very large, much larger than 4: this is due to the fact that CRs can escape the
system (from upstream) and take away energy with them, so that the shock turns
out to be eﬀectively radiative.
An important consequence related to the development of a precursor is that
the spectrum of accelerated particles is now no longer a power-law, but it rather
develops a concave shape, with a slope in momentum, γp, that is steeper than 4 at
low energies and ﬂatter than 4 at high energies. This is easily understood based on
the expression for γp in Eq. 1 and the velocity proﬁle in the right panel of Fig. 2, that
clearly shows how the velocity compression ratio is now a function of distance from
the shock. Particles of diﬀerent energies diﬀusively propagate to diﬀerent distances
from the shock, with lower energy particles conﬁned closer to the shock than higher
energy ones. As a consequence, the former experience only the compression ratio of
the subshock, which is less than 4, making the spectrum steeper than p−4, while
the latter propagate into the precursor experiencing progressively larger compression
ratios. Far enough in the precursor the compression ratio becomes RT > 4 and the
spectrum ﬂatter than p−4.
The picture just described qualitatively, is illustrated in a more quantitative way
in Fig. 3, where we show the cosmic ray pressure proﬁle and ﬂuid velocity proﬁle
on the left, and the particle spectrum immediately downstream on the right, all as
a function of shock modiﬁcation. Before discussing the results shown in this ﬁgure,


===== PAGE 10 =====

October 9, 2018
14:54
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Amato
10
Elena Amato
let us consider the general set of equations to be solved in order to fully describe
the modiﬁed shock dynamics:
• mass conservation
∂ρ
∂t = −∂(ρu)
∂x
(10)
• momentum conservation
∂ρ
∂t = −∂
∂x

ρu2 + Pg + Pc + Pw

(11)
• energy conservation
∂
∂t
ρu2
2
+
Pg
γg −1

= −∂
∂x
ρu3
2
+ γgPgu
γg −1

−u ∂
∂x [Pc + Pw]+ΓthEw (12)
• transport equation
∂f(t, x, p)
∂t
+ ˆu(x)∂f(t, x, p)
∂x
=
(13)
= ∂
∂x

D(x, p)∂f(t, x, p)
∂x

+ p
3
∂f(t, x, p)
∂p
dˆu(x)
dx
• evolution of the waves
∂Ew
∂t
+ ∂Fw
∂x = u∂Pw
∂x + σEw −ΓthEw
(14)
• turbulent plasma heating
∂Pg
∂t + u∂Pg
∂x + γgPg
du
dx = (γg −1)ΓthEw
(15)
In the above equations, the diﬀerent symbols have the following meaning. ρ is the
gas density, u its velocity, Pg and γg its pressure and adiabatic index respectively. Pc
is the CR pressure, to be derived from their distribution function f. In the transport
equation D is the diﬀusion coeﬃcient and ˆu is the velocity of the scattering centres:
ˆu(x) = u(x) ± vw(x), with vw the phase velocity of the waves. Finally Pw, Ew and
Fw are the pressure, energy and energy ﬂux of the magnetic waves, while σ and Γth
are the wave growth and damping rate respectively. The latter obviously coincides
with the rate at which the plasma is heated non-adiabatically (Eq. 15).
The ﬁnal missing ingredient is a recipe for injection of particles into the ac-
celeration process. For that, a widely adopted prescription is the so-called thermal
leakage43, namely the assumption that all particles with a Larmor radius larger than
some multiple of the shock thickness start being accelerated. The latter is compara-
ble in turn with the Larmor radius of the thermal particles downstream, so that in
the end all particles with p > pinj = ξpth,2 are injected, with pth,2 =
p
2mpkBT2. It
is worth mentioning that while the thermal leakage has been a popular prescription
for particle injection for a long time, recent results of hybrid simulations44 seem to
point to picture in which the probability for a particle to start being accelerated
is independent on its momentum. The detailed physics of injection is an important


===== PAGE 11 =====

October 9, 2018
14:54
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Amato
The origin of Galactic Cosmic Rays
11
Fig. 3.
Properties of a modiﬁed shock. The left panel shows the spatial proﬁle of the ﬂuid velocity
and CR pressure in the region upstream of the shock. The shock position is coincident with the
left boundary of the box. The upper panel shows the CR pressure normalised to the shock ram
pressure. The lower panel shows the ﬂuid velocity proﬁle normalised to the velocity at upstream
inﬁnity. On the right we plot the particle spectrum immediately downstream of the shock. In all
panels the diﬀerent curves correspond to diﬀerent Mach numbers: red (solid) is for M0 = 100;
green (dot-dashed) is for M0 = 30, blue (dotted) is for M0 = 5.
subject that can only be investigated by means of numerical simulations, with Par-
ticle In Cell and hybrid methods. These kinds of simulations, especially in more
than 1 spatial dimension, were for a long time beyond the existing computational
capabilities. While in the least decade, PIC simulations have been used intensively
to investigate relativistic shocks (less challenging from the computational point of
view), only now hybrid simulations start appearing in the literature44,45 with the
set-up appropriate to describe non-relativistic shocks, bearing the promise of fun-
damental progress in our understanding of the acceleration physics at collisionless
shocks.
A steady state solution for this set of equations in the shock frame can be found
through an iterative method37,38,41,42. In Fig. 3, we illustrate the result of such a
calculation carried out for a shock velocity u0 = 5×108cms−1 and assuming thermal
leakage with ξ = 3.5. We plot the predicted particle distribution function and the
spatial proﬁles of ﬂuid velocity and CR pressure. The results shown in this ﬁgure
deserve some comments.
On the left panel, the precursor qualitatively illustrated in the right panel of
Fig. 2, now clearly appears to become more pronounced with increasing shock Mach
number. This is due to the fact that the shock acceleration eﬃciency is increasing
with M0, as shown on the upper left panel of the ﬁgure, where the fraction of
energy that is transformed in CRs, ξc = Pc/(ρv2
S), is shown. With increasing ξc,
the CR spectrum becomes progressively more modiﬁed: its concavity becomes more
pronounced and the high energy slope well ﬂatter than 4. At the same time the peak
of the maxwellian part of the distribution function progressively shifts towards the
left: the larger fraction of energy converted into accelerated particles has been taken
from the thermal energy of the downstream plasma, whose temperature decreases.


===== PAGE 12 =====

October 9, 2018
14:54
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Amato
12
Elena Amato
Overall, Fig. 3 illustrates well two of the three most important predictions of the
non-linear theory of shock acceleration: in a SNR that is eﬃciently accelerating CRs,
one expects to measure a lower downstream plasma temperature than Rankine-
Hugoniot relations would dictate, and, if direct signatures of non-thermal particles
can be seen (e.g. through γ-ray emission associated with the decay of pions from
nuclear scatterings), their high energy spectrum should be ﬂatter than p−4.
In addition to these two, there is a third signature of eﬃcient acceleration,
namely the ampliﬁcation of magnetic ﬁelds induced by the accelerated particles.
We already mentioned that accelerated particles can stream ahead of the shock,
which is exactly how a precursor is created. What we should add, however, is that
this streaming provides a source of instability in the upstream plasma that leads to
magnetic ﬁeld ampliﬁcation. This process might produce magnetic ﬁelds which are
much more intense than the average B0 in the ISM and this is the reason why we are
forced to include magnetic pressure and energy terms in the conservation equations
(Eqs. 11-12): the magnetic pressure in the upstream can easily grow to values that
exceed the thermal pressure of the plasma40,42 and have important dynamical con-
sequences. Indeed, when this happens, the plasma compressibility changes and as a
result the shock modiﬁcation is much reduced even for high Mach number shocks
and high acceleration eﬃciencies, thus changing somewhat the results illustrated in
Fig. 3, that was obtained ignoring these eﬀects. In addition, as shown in Eq. 15,
part of the magnetic energy will be damped on to the plasma at the end of the tur-
bulent cascade, increasing its temperature. This is the so-called turbulent heating46.
An accurate physical description of this phenomenon can be rather complex and
uncertain, involving the microphysics of wave dissipation in a plasma, so usually it
is simply accounted for through a phenomenological parametrization. The eﬀects
of turbulent heating will be especially important when discussing the properties of
shocks propagating in a partially ionised plasma (Sec. 8).
The physical process of magnetic ﬁeld ampliﬁcation (MFA hereafter) has re-
ceived very much attention during the last few years, especially because, as we al-
ready mentioned, it provides our best hope to explain CR acceleration up to the knee
in SNRs, possibly the only hope unless most SNR shocks are quasi-perpendicular.
This very important topic will be introduced in the next subsection and then further
discussed in Sec. 7.
3.1. Magnetic ﬁeld ampliﬁcation in the standard picture
The fact that super-alfv´enic streaming of CRs induces the growth of magnetic waves
(Alfv´en waves) has been well known for many years. Indeed, already in the ’70s47
the interaction of CRs with self-generated Alfv´en waves was suggested as the expla-
nation for the observed near-isotropy of the CR ﬂux. The general idea is as follows:
as soon as there are energetic particles streaming at a speed that is larger than the
local Alfv´en speed (the characteristic speed of magnetic disturbances parallel to the
pre-existing magnetic ﬁeld in a medium), Alfv´en waves of appropriate wavelength


===== PAGE 13 =====

October 9, 2018
14:54
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Amato
The origin of Galactic Cosmic Rays
13
become unstable and grow in amplitude. The “appropriate wavelength” 2π/κr, with
κr the wavenumber, is established by the condition of resonance with the streaming
particles’ Larmor radius: κrrL = 1. The particles transfer momentum to the waves
and the process leads to isotropization of the particle distribution. For relativistic
particles, the residual anisotropy, after a few growth periods of the waves, is of order
vA/c, in excellent agreement with what direct observations of galactic CRs show48.
The waves excited when CRs propagate in the Galaxy have a well known growth
rate, given by49,22:
Γres = π
8
vd
vA
nCR(p > pres)
ni
Ω∗
ci ,
(16)
where vA =
p
B2
0/(4πnimi) is the Alfv´en speed with B0 the unperturbed magnetic
ﬁeld and mi and ni the mass and density of ions in the medium, respectively,
Ω∗
ci = eB0/(mic) is the ion cyclotron frequency and vd is the particle drift velocity.
When one is concerned with magnetic ﬁeld ampliﬁcation associated with particle
acceleration in a SNR, vd coincides with the shock velocity. From the expression for
Γres in Eq. 16, one can derive the wave energy growth rate σ that appears in Eq. 14,
as σ = 2Γres.
In addition, the relation between energy ﬂux, energy and pressure are all well
known for Alfv´en waves and so are their transmission properties. In practice, in the
case of Alfv´en waves, Eqs. 10-15 can be rephrased in such a way as to form a closed
set, in which also the ampliﬁed magnetic ﬁeld, the particle diﬀusion coeﬃcient38 and
the maximum achievable energy39 can be calculated self-consistently as a function
of the shock speed u0, thermal leakage parameter ξ and turbulent heating parameter
Γth.
The calculation can be performed at diﬀerent stages during the evolution of a
SNR, assuming that a steady-state is always reached on a time-scale that is less than
the dynamical time-scale of the remnant. Under this assumption, which is expected
to be a good one except for the highest energy particles, both the spectrum of
accelerated particles in the source and the ﬂux of particles escaping from the source
can be computed as a function of time. Let us brieﬂy discuss what the resulting
spectrum of CRs injected in the ISM turns out to be.
3.2. Escaping particles
The escape of particles towards upstream inﬁnity during the acceleration process
is an essential feature of models of non-linear CR acceleration at shocks: as we
already mentioned, this phenomenon is the very reason why compression factors
larger than 4 can be achieved in eﬃcient accelerators. Of course, aside from the
theory one adopts to describe the accelerator, eﬀective escape while the acceleration
is still ongoing is fundamental if high energy particles must be released in the ISM.
Waiting for the shock to disappear and for the SNR to merge in the ISM would
imply large adiabatic losses for the particles and CRs at the knee, that are so diﬃcult
to accelerate, would never be detected at Earth.


===== PAGE 14 =====

October 9, 2018
14:54
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Amato
14
Elena Amato
Understanding how particles escape from the shock is obviously essential to
understand how the spectrum of CRs that we observe at Earth is formed. The
system of Equations in Sec. 3 automatically tells us what fraction of the energy
ﬂux is carried away by escaping particles. What it does not tell us immediately is
their spectrum. This can however be worked out41,50,51 and the result is that, at
each time during the system evolution, it consists of a function strongly peaked in
energy around the maximum energy that the system is able to guarantee at that
time. If this is the case, then one can give a back of the envelope estimate of the
spectrum released over time, simply by expressing the energy ﬂux carried away by
the particles at pmax to a fraction fesc of the total energy ﬂux processed by the
shock:
4πp2Nesc(p)c p dp = fesc
1
2ρv3
S4πR2
Sdt
(17)
Assuming RS ∝tα (and hence VS ∝tα−1) and assuming that pmax ∝tβ (as
would be true for example if the maximum momentum were limited by the size of
the system, pmax ∝RS) it is straightforward to see, that, since dt/dp ∝t/p, one
obtains, from a SNR expanding in the uniform ISM:
Nesc(p) ∝fesc p−4 t5α−2
(18)
It follows, that in the Sedov-Taylor phase, when α = 2/5, SNRs will release a
spectrum Nesc(p) ∝p−4, if fesc keeps constant with time. Since, during the Sedov-
Taylor phase, we expect β < 0, namely the maximum momentum to decrease with
time, in order to have a spectrum steeper than p−4, the fraction of energy that escap-
ing particles take away, fesc would have to increase with time. In reality, when the
entire calculation, including acceleration and escape, is carried out self-consistently,
the spectrum of escaping particles often turns out to be ﬂatter than p−4. In Fig. 4
we show the result of such a calculation , where the maximum energy at every time
is set by the condition that particles can only be accelerated up to energies such
that their Larmor radius does not exceed 15% of the SNR radius at that time.
Three important features can be noticed in the Figure, that corresponds to the
particle release by an “average” SNR, that accelerates particles rather eﬃciently
while evolving in a uniform medium with temperature 105 K: 1) while the spectrum
of escaping particles is ﬂatter than p−4, the overall spectrum (escaping particles
plus particles advocated in the downstream and released at late times) has a slope
close to p−4; 2) only particles that escape the system from upstream (dashed line)
contribute at the highest energies; 3) the maximum energy that can be achieved by
such remnant falls short of the knee.
4. Theory confronts observations
The discussion above was meant at illustrating NLDSA theory and its basic predic-
tions. The ﬁrst obvious test of the association between Galactic CRs and SNRs


===== PAGE 15 =====

October 9, 2018
14:54
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Amato
The origin of Galactic Cosmic Rays
15
Fig. 4.
Left panel: the spectrum of CRs released in the ISM (Ref. 51) by a SNR that accelerates
particles eﬃciently during its lifetime, while expanding in a uniform medium with temperature
T = 105 K. The dashed line is the spectrum of particles escaping from upstream; the dot-dashed
line is the spectrum of particles that are advocated in the downstream and released only at late
times, when the SNR merges in the ISM.
involves making predictions for signatures of eﬃcient acceleration in these sys-
tems, and checking them against the data. The most obvious place to start from
is non-thermal emission. Several SNRs show non-thermal X-ray emission due to
synchrotron radiation by relativistic electrons, and a few also show γ-ray emission,
that usually can be due either to Inverse Compton scattering of the same relativistic
electrons responsible for the X-rays, or to π0 decay following nuclear collisions of
relativistic protons: as we will discuss in the following detailed calculations taking
into account multi-wavelength data are usually necessary in order to distinguish
between these two scenarios.
In general, at a SNR shock that is eﬃciently accelerating CRs we expect to
observe:
1. compression ratios larger than 4
2. downstream temperature less than what expected based on the Rankine-
Hugoniot relations
3. concave particle spectra
4. possible signatures of the existence of a precursor, in the spatial structure
of non-thermal emission
5. signatures of ampliﬁed magnetic ﬁelds
6. γ-ray observations: direct signatures of the presence of relativistic protons,
up to the knee, through π0 decay γ-rays where the target density for inelastic
nuclear collisions is large enough
A few relevant observations follow for each of the items listed above.


===== PAGE 16 =====

October 9, 2018
14:54
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Amato
16
Elena Amato
4.1. Compression ratios
We have indeed evidence in at least 2 young SNRs, Tycho and SN100652,53. The
evidence comes from measurements of the distance between the contact discontinu-
ity and the shock, that leads to infer a compression ratio of order 7 in both cases.
This value of the compression ratio is in perfect agreement with the predictions
of NLDSA for the case of a shock that is eﬃciently accelerating particles and in
which, either eﬃcient turbulent heating takes place in the precursor, or the mag-
netic ﬁeld is ampliﬁed to levels that make its energy density comparable with that
of the thermal plasma upstream40,42.
4.2. Downstream temperature
An unexpectedly low downstream temperature has indeed been inferred in SNR
RCW86 from Balmer emission11. This measurement initially led its authors to de-
duce extremely eﬃcient CR acceleration in this remnant, with conversion into ac-
celerated particles of ≈50% of the shock kinetic energy. This estimate then had to
be revised, as we will discuss in Sec. 8, but nonetheless, current estimates still give
an acceleration eﬃciency about 20-30 %. This subject will be discussed further in
Sec. 8.
4.3. Concave spectra
Also hints of concave spectra have been found: a few SNRs show a radio emission
spectrum that becomes harder with increasing frequency54. In addition a concave
spectrum seems also favoured from ﬁtting the SED of SN1006 and RCW8610.
4.4. Spatial proﬁle of the emission
SN1006 is also a good example of how the spatial proﬁle of the emission can be used
to derive the CR acceleration eﬃciency: indeed the X-ray emission proﬁle is best
reproduced55 by assuming that the shock is accelerating CRs with an eﬃciency of
order 30%. The same exercise, carried out for the case of Tycho56, and considering
both the X-ray and the radio emission, leads to conclude that here the acceleration
eﬃciency is of order 10%.
4.5. Ampliﬁed magnetic ﬁelds
In the last few years Chandra has allowed us to measure the thickness of the X-ray
emitting region, showing that in a number of remnants this is extremely compact,
of order of 0.01 pc. The simplest interpretation of these thin rims of emission is
in terms of synchrotron burn-oﬀ: the emission region is thin because electrons lose
energy over a scale that is of order
p
Dτsync, where D is the diﬀusion coeﬃcient
and τsync is their synchrotron lifetime. Assuming Bohm diﬀusion, this length turns
out to be independent of the particle energies and given by
p
Dτsync ≈0.04B−3/2
−4
,


===== PAGE 17 =====

October 9, 2018
14:54
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Amato
The origin of Galactic Cosmic Rays
17
where B−4 is the ﬁeld in units of 100 µG, therefore requiring that the magnetic
ﬁeld responsible for both propagation and losses be in the 100 µG range10,8.
Another observation that led to infer a large magnetic ﬁeld is that of fast time-
variability of the X-ray emission in SNR RX J1713.7-394657. Again a ﬁeld in the
100µG −1mG range was estimated, interpreting the variability time-scale as the
time-scale for synchrotron losses of the emitting electrons.
Such high ﬁelds are strongly suggestive of eﬃcient acceleration and of the devel-
opment of related instabilities. However it should be mentioned that also alterna-
tive interpretations are possible58,59. For example their origin might be associated
to ﬂuid instabilities that are totally unrelated to accelerated particles60. There-
fore while the evidence for largely ampliﬁed ﬁelds seems very strong, it cannot be
considered as a deﬁnite proof of eﬃcient CR acceleration.
In reality, the situation is even more complicated than so far described: recent
re-analyses of the streaming instability at CR eﬃciency shocks show that its growth
must be revised with respect to the estimate given in Eq. 16 and widely used in the
modelling of NLDSA with MFA. In particular, at a shock where CRs are important
in terms of the current they carry, the growth rate of resonant Alfv´en waves is
slower than described by Eq. 16, whereas previously ignored non-resonant modes
grow much faster. We will discuss this fact and its consequences in a dedicated
Section (Sec. 7).
4.6. γ-ray emission
The diﬀusion coeﬃcient in the ampliﬁed ﬁeld is suﬃciently reduced so as to guar-
antee particle acceleration up to the knee in the early phases of SNR evolution. We
would then expect to ﬁnd some remnants accelerating particles up to energies close
to 1 PeV among the young galactic SNRs. The high sensitivity of the latest genera-
tion of γ-ray telescopes, both from space and from the ground, has ﬁnally allowed us
to observe the γ-ray emission of a number of remnants, in a quest for direct signa-
tures of the presence of accelerated protons. These would reveal themselves through
the process of pion production and successive decay: nuclear collisions of energetic
protons with ambient gas produce pions, both charged and neutrals; the latter then
decay into gamma-rays. In the environment of a SNR, however, even when γ-ray
emission is detected, it is not straightforward to pin down its origin beyond doubt.
In general γ-rays can be either of hadronic or leptonic origin (Inverse Compton Scat-
tering of relativistic electrons responsible of lower frequency synchrotron emission).
Multifrequency modelling of the emission can help disentangle between diﬀerent
scenarios, but ﬁrm conclusions are diﬃcult to obtain.
A good example of how complex the situation can be is provided by the case
of SNR RX J1713.7-3946, the ﬁrst SNR to be observed in TeV γ-rays61. X-ray ob-
servations of this young remnant had pointed to the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld
in the 100µG range, suggestive of eﬃcient CR acceleration62. Therefore, when it
was ﬁnally observed in high energy γ-rays, many diﬀerent groups tried to model


===== PAGE 18 =====

October 9, 2018
14:54
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Amato
18
Elena Amato
Fig. 5.
Left panel: the integrated emission spectra of W44 (Ref. 70). Right panel: the integrated
emission spectrum of Tycho (Ref. 56). The diﬀerent curves represent diﬀerent contributions to the
total emission. A detailed explanation can be found in Refs. 70and 56, from which the ﬁgures are
taken. In both cases the γ-ray emission is primarily of hadronic origin: yellow curve in the left
panel, free dot-dashed curve one the right panel. In the ﬁrst case the proton spectrum becomes
very steep above 20 GeV, whereas in the second case the maximum proton energy is 500 TeV.
its multifrequency emission in order to understand whether the gamma-rays were
most likely of leptonic or hadronic origin62,63: the general conclusion was that the
hadronic origin was most likely. Then more reﬁned modelling of thermal X-ray emis-
sion started to cast doubts on this interpretation pointing towards a density of the
ambient medium lower than required by the hadronic models64. In the end, the ini-
tial conclusion had to change radically when lower energy gamma-ray observations
with Fermi65, showed that the photon spectrum in the MeV-GeV energy range was
too ﬂat to be explained as due to π0 decay.
In recent times direct evidence of π0 decay gamma-rays has been found in at
least two middle aged SNRs interacting with molecular clouds, W4466,67 (whose
broad band spectrum is shown in the left panel of Fig. 5) and IC44368,69. For both
remnants the hadronic interpretation of the gamma-ray emission is considered as
certain, so we ﬁnally face the long-sought evidence of accelerated protons in SNRs.
While this discovery provides support to the CR-SNR paradigm, it does not really
show us the CR accelerators at their best. We mentioned that these are middle-aged
SNRs (tens of thousands year old) and they are likely not accelerating CRs very
eﬃciently: their γ-ray brightness is not due to a high ﬂux of relativistic hadrons,
but rather to a high target density for nuclear collisions, thanks to the interaction
with a molecular cloud. And indeed, when one takes a closer look at the gamma-
ray spectrum, the striking feature common to both remnants is an inferred proton
spectrum that is steeper than E−2 at all energies and becomes very steep (E−γe
with γe ≈2.5 −3) at energies larger than a few tens of GeV. Both features are very
diﬀerent than what we were expecting to see in the sources of Galactic CRs (ﬂat
spectra and 104 times larger proton energies).
Direct proof of eﬃcient CR acceleration in SNRs can only be found in young
objects, in spite of the fact that their modelling might be more complicated and
deﬁnite conclusions more diﬃcult to draw, as we already mentioned for the case of


===== PAGE 19 =====

October 9, 2018
14:54
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Amato
The origin of Galactic Cosmic Rays
19
RX J1713.7-3946. Currently, the best candidate as a hadronic emitter among young
remnants seems to be Tycho (whose broad band spectrum is shown in the right
panel of Fig. 5). Here, multifrequency modelling56 leads to infer a maximum proton
energy of order 500 TeV, which is deﬁnitely getting close to the knee. However, even
in this case the picture is not fully satisfactory: the radiation spectrum implies a
spectrum of the emitting particles that is f ∝E−γe with γe ≈2.2 −2.3. Again
the observations point to a particle spectrum that is steeper than E−2, contrary to
our theoretical expectations. An analogously steep spectrum is inferred for another
young remnant, Cas A71, although here the modelling is more complicated and the
evidence that γ-rays are of hadronic nature less compelling.
4.7. A succesfull comparison?
Theory seems to come out well from the above comparison with observations if one
just counts the number of successful predictions versus discrepancies. However the
discrepancy in terms of particle spectra is clearly very serious.
In addition, it is made even more serious by recent studies of the CR propagation
in the Galaxy, that also seem to require CRs to be injected in the Galaxy with a
spectrum steeper than E−2. We review this latter result in the following, and then
discuss possible ways in which the theory can be modiﬁed to account for steep
source spectra.
5. The CR spectrum injected in the Galaxy
The CR spectrum at Earth results from the combination of injection and propaga-
tion. The basic expectation for how the spectrum at Earth relates to that injected by
the sources is easily obtained in the so-called leaky box model of CR propagation. In
these models the Galaxy is described as a cylinder of radius Rd and height H, with
Rd ≈15 kpc, the radius of the Galactic disk, and H ≈3 kpc, the extent above the
disk of the magnetised Galactic halo as estimated from radio synchrotron emission.
Cosmic Rays are conﬁned within this cylinder for a time τesc ≈H2/D(E) with D(E)
the diﬀusion coeﬃcient in the Galaxy. Let us write the latter as D(E) = D0Eδ, if
CR sources inject a spectrum Ns(E) ∝E−γinj the spectrum of primary CRs at
Earth will be:
N(E) ≈Ns(E)RSN
2πR2
dHτesc
∝E−γinj−δ .
(19)
Therefore what we measure at Earth only provides us with the sum of γinj and δ.
On the other hand, during their propagation in the Galaxy CRs undergo spallation
processes and there are chemical elements that mostly result from these interactions,
such as for example Boron. The spectrum of secondaries will be given by:
NSEC(E) ≈N(E)Rspallτesc ∝E−γinj−2δ ,
(20)
where Rspall is the rate of spallation reactions. It is clear then that the ratio between
the ﬂux of secondaries and primaries at a given energy NSEC(E)/N(E) ∝E−δ can


===== PAGE 20 =====

October 9, 2018
14:54
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Amato
20
Elena Amato
Fig. 6.
B/C ratio as a function of energy per nucleon. Data from the Cosmic Ray Database
(Ref. 72).
provide us with a direct probe on the energy dependence of the Galactic diﬀusion
coeﬃcient and hence allow us to infer the spectrum injected by the sources.
A compilation of available measurements of the B/C ratio is shown in Fig. 6 as a
function of energy per nucleon. It is immediately apparent from the Figure that the
error bars on the high energy data points are rather large, and leave a considerable
uncertainty on the energy dependence of the diﬀusion coeﬃcient, being compatible73
with anything in the interval 1/3 < δ < 0.7. As a consequence, the slope of the CR
spectrum at injection is also uncertain in the interval 2 < γinj < 2.4.
One thing that we can try to do in order to obtain more reﬁned constraints on
the sources from CR observations at Earth is to go beyond the simpliﬁcations of
the leaky box description of CR propagation. In particular, one ingredient that is
missing in the leaky box model and in most calculations of the CR propagation from
their sources to Earth (through e.g. GALPROP74 or DRAGON75) is the discrete
nature of these sources in space and time. Calculations taking this eﬀect in account
have only recently appeared in the literature76,77,78 and show two important facts,
that Figs. 7 and 8 should help illustrate.
In the calculations behind the plots in these ﬁgures, CRs are assumed to be
injected by SNRs that explode at random places in the Galaxy, with a probability
following the spatial distribution of pulsars and with a rate RSN = (1−3)/100 yr−1.
Each SNR is assumed to accelerate particles with an eﬃciency ranging between
3-15%, and the accelerated particles then propagate through the Galaxy and to
Earth with a rigidity dependent, spatially homogeneous diﬀusion coeﬃcient, that
is normalised in such a way as to ensure that the B/C ratio can be reproduced
(see Ref. 77for details). Fig. 7 shows the all particle spectrum resulting from two
diﬀerent description of injection and propagation. In the left panel we compare with
data the spectrum that is obtained assuming γinj = 2.34 and δ = 1/3, while the


===== PAGE 21 =====

October 9, 2018
14:54
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Amato
The origin of Galactic Cosmic Rays
21
Fig. 7.
All particle spectrum at Earth obtained from discrete sources under two diﬀerent assump-
tions on injection and propagation (see text for more details). On the left γinj = 2.34 and δ = 1/3
is assumed, while on the right γinj = 2.07 and δ = 0.6. The symbols represent the data obtained as
an average between the diﬀerent experiments (Ref. 79); the diﬀerent curves correspond to diﬀerent
realisations of the source distributions and the staircase like curve represents the average over the
diﬀerent realisations.
right panel corresponds to γinj = 2.07 and δ = 0.6. It is apparent that the data
can be reproduced reasonably well in both models up to the energies corresponding
to the transition between Galactic and Extragalactic CRs. The situation changes
radically, however, when one considers the anisotropy expected in these two diﬀerent
scenarios. This is shown in Fig. 8, where the left and right panel corresponds to the
same situations considered in the left and right panel of Fig. 7.
In a regime of diﬀusive propagation, the anisotropy is deﬁned as⃗
δA = −3D(E)
c⃗
∇nCR
nCR
(21)
and hence it is especially sensitive to the diﬀusion coeﬃcient. Indeed, the degeneracy
between the two diﬀerent propagation scenarios is broken in Fig. 8, which clearly
shows that for ﬂat source spectra and fast dependence of the diﬀusion coeﬃcient on
energy the amplitude of the anisotropy is systematically overestimated by a large
factor.
One could object that actually, based on Fig. 8, also the scenario on the right
has problems at accounting for the observations, in spite of the fact that the dis-
crepancy is less than on the left. However this latter discrepancy can be explained
and overcome if the actual distribution of nearby sources and the subtleties involved
in the measurements are taken into account80, leading to the conclusion that the
ensemble of diﬀerent observables favours a scenario in which SNRs inject a relatively
steep particle spectrum γinj ≈2.3 −2.4 and propagation in the Galaxy occurs as
expected for the case of a Kolmogorov-like spectrum of magnetic turbulence.
6. Revising NLDSA theory
The basic theory of NLDSA predicts a spectrum of CRs in SNRs that is typically
ﬂatter than p−4. In the cases where γ-rays are observed and their hadronic inter-


===== PAGE 22 =====

October 9, 2018
14:54
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Amato
22
Elena Amato
Fig. 8.
Anisotropy of the CR ﬂux at Earth obtained from discrete sources under two diﬀerent
assumptions on injection and propagation (see text for more details). On the left γinj = 2.34
and δ = 1/3 is assumed, while on the right γinj = 2.07 and δ = 0.6. The symbols represent the
data from diﬀerent experiments as speciﬁed in Ref. 77; the diﬀerent curves correspond to diﬀerent
realisations of the source distributions and the staircase like curve represents the average over the
diﬀerent realisations.
pretation is favoured, the inferred particle spectra are systematically steeper81 than
p−4. This apparent discrepancy might actually ﬁnd an explanation in the subtleties
of particle transport in the presence of an ampliﬁed magnetic ﬁeld. Looking back
at Eq. 14, one notices the presence of the velocity of the scattering centres ˆu in
the places where the ﬂuid velocity usually appears when dealing with test-particle
descriptions. The correct velocity to use is actually ˆu, which is given by the sum of
the ﬂuid velocity and the phase velocity of the scattering waves82,81. Most of the
times, however, the latter can be ignored, being coincident with the Alfv´en speed
associated with the unperturbed magnetic ﬁeld and hence totally negligible with
respect to the former. In the presence of magnetic ﬁeld ampliﬁcation, however, this
may no longer be the case and the wave speed can in principle become relevant.
Indeed it was shown that the spectral indices observed in a number of SNRs at
GeV and TeV energies can be accommodated within NLDSA with MFA if the wave
speed that enters the calculations is taken to be the Alfv´en speed computed in the
ampliﬁed ﬁeld81.
When this is done, both the spectra at the sources (see Fig. 9) and the spectrum
released by the source in the ISM (right panel of Fig. 6) can become steeper than
E−2 even in the presence of eﬃcient acceleration. In fact, the initial theoretical
prediction of NLDSA is even overturned: the more eﬃcient the acceleration, the
steeper the spectrum.
These results are very interesting but should be taken with caution. The main
uncertainty is related to the propagation direction of the magnetic perturbations,
which leads to a corresponding uncertainty on whether the modiﬁed Alfv´en speed
should be added or subtracted from the plasma motion on the two sides of the
shock. In principle, magnetic ﬁeld ampliﬁcation could even lead to ﬂatter spectra, a
possibility also invoked in the literature already in early studies of shock acceleration
physics22.


===== PAGE 23 =====

October 9, 2018
14:54
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Amato
The origin of Galactic Cosmic Rays
23
Fig. 9.
Comparison with existing data at GeV (eft panel) and TeV (right panel) energies of the
spectral indices predicted for SNRs with diﬀerent acceleration eﬃciencies ξCR (ﬁgures taken from
Ref. 81). The prediction takes into account the eﬀect of the ampliﬁed ﬁeld in the velocity of the
scattering centres.
Fig. 10.
Revised prediction for the spectrum released in the ISM by a SNR that is eﬃciently
accelerating CRs (ﬁgure taken from Ref. 83). Diﬀerent line-types refer to diﬀerent ages, as speciﬁed
in the ﬁgure, while thick lines are for the spectrum advected downstream and thin lines are for
the instantaneous escape. The prediction takes into account the eﬀect of the ampliﬁed ﬁeld in the
velocity of the scattering centres.
7. Revising MFA theory
While the modiﬁcation of the NLDSA theory just described was prompted by the
need of explaining new data, another important revision of the framework described
in Sec. 3 is imposed by the discovery of a ﬂaw in the equations: the growth rate of
the magnetic perturbations in Eq. 16, that was adopted in most of the calculations
of the last few years, is not the correct one to use in the vicinity of an eﬃcient
CR accelerator. Eq. 16 represents an excellent approximation to the growth rate of
waves only in the so-called weakly driven regime, namely when CRs are few and
their streaming velocity is not very large, in other words when the current they
carry is not very large.


===== PAGE 24 =====

October 9, 2018
14:54
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Amato
24
Elena Amato
Let us consider a system that is made of a positively charged cloud of CRs prop-
agating in the ISM at the shock speed, vS, and let us assume that the background
magnetic ﬁeld of strength B0 is parallel to the shock normal (namely parallel to vs.
In the shock frame CRs, with density nCR, are isotropic and have a power-law spec-
trum, while the ISM appears as a cold quasi-neutral plasma, with ions, whose density
we call ni, drifting at vS, and electrons with density ne = ni + nCR = ni(1 + λCR)
moving at a slightly lower speed ve = vS/(1 + λCR), so as to ensure charge and
current neutrality.
The dispersion relation for parallel propagating waves (⃗k ∥⃗B0) in such a system
is found as84:
c2k2
ω2
= 1+
X
s
4π2q2
s
ω
Z
dp
Z
dµp2v(p)(1 −µ2)
ω −kvµ ± Ωs
∂f0,s
∂p
+ 1
p
vk
ω −µ
 ∂f0,s
∂µ

(22)
where the sum is over the plasma species s, of electric charge qs, and f0,s is the
unperturbed distribution function of each species. The underlying assumption is
that the f0,s are gyrotropic, namely only dependent on the modulus of⃗p and on the
pitch angle µ. In addition Ωs = qsB0/msγsc is the relativistic gyrofrequency of each
species, with γs the appropriate Lorentz factor. Adopting a spectrum f(p) ∝p−4
for the accelerated particles, and considering only low frequency waves ω ≪kvS,
the dispersion relation that one ﬁnds reads85,86,87,88:
ω2 = v2
Ak2 + λCRkvSΩ∗
ci [Φ(x) + iΨ(x)]
(23)
with
Φ(x) = ±1
2

1 −[1 −x2]
2x
ln

1 + x
1 −x


and
Ψ(x) = π
4
 x
x < 1
1/x x > 1
(24)
In the above expressions x = krL,0, with rL,0 the Larmor radius of the lowest energy
particles being accelerated, and Ω∗
ci = eB0/mp c is the non relativistic ion cyclotron
frequency.
The above dispersion relation is found to have rather diﬀerent solutions in the
regime of strong and weak CR current, namely depending on whether
4π
c JCR
>
< kB0 .
(25)
For weak CR currents an excellent approximation for the solution of Eq. 23 is
provided by:
Re(ω) = kvA,
Im(ω) = π
8
vS
vA
nCR
ni
Ω∗
ci
 x
x < 1
1/x x > 1 .
(26)
Eq. 26 essentially states that the perturbations that grow eﬀectively are Alfv´en
waves and they only grow eﬀectively in a range of wavelengths such that there
are particles able to produce them resonantly: this condition is realised for all k
such that k < 1/rL,0 and the wave-growth peaks at k = 1/rL,0, which is where
the number of resonant particles is largest. An important thing to notice is that
Im(ω) in Eq. 26 is essentially the same as Γres in Eq. 16, and this is also the growth


===== PAGE 25 =====

October 9, 2018
14:54
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Amato
The origin of Galactic Cosmic Rays
25
rate that was used for CR induced waves not only in the works dealing with CR
propagation in the Galaxy, for which situation the weak current approximation is
appropriate, but also, erroneously, for wave growth in the vicinity of a CR modiﬁed
shock (see e.g. Ref. 38), where the CR current is certainly not weak. Indeed, the
condition in Eq. 25 can be rewritten in terms of CR acceleration eﬃciency, obtaining
that the current is strong as soon as:
ξCR
>
∼
Λ
3
v2
Ac
v3
S
≈10−4
 B0
µG
2 
vS
109cms−1
−3
,
(27)
where
ξCR =
PCR
ni mv2
S
=
1
nimv2
S
Z pmax
pmin
dpp2 vp
3 f(p)
(28)
is the fraction of kinetic energy of the blast wave that gets converted into CRs, and
we took Λ = ln(Emax/Emin) = 15.
For the case of strong current, the solution of Eq. 23 for the resonant modes
(x < 1) can be written as:
Re(ω) = Im(ω) =
rπ
8
nCR
ni
mvS
pmin
Ω∗
cix .
(29)
For large wave-numbers, where the instability is excited non-resonantly, the solution
depends on the polarisation.
The general solution of the dispersion relation written in Eq. 23 is plotted in
Fig. 11 for values of the parameters typical of a SNR shock that is eﬃciently accel-
erating CRs, namely: vS = 109cms−1, ϵCR = 0.1. Together with the solution of the
dispersion relation (solid lines for the real part of ω and dashed lines for its imag-
inary part), also the approximate expressions for the growth-rate of the resonant
branch in Eq. 26 and Eq. 29 are shown as a dotted (red) curve and as a dot-dashed
(blue) curve respectively. It is clear that adopting the expression in Eq. 26 leads to
overestimate the growth-rate of the instability by a large factor.
From the physics point of view, what had been neglected, when blindly taking
the growth rate of the streaming instability from studies devoted to CR propagation
in the ISM, was the fact that when CRs are numerous and fast, they deeply aﬀect the
dispersion relation of parallel propagating waves, changing not only the imaginary
par of the frequency, but also the real part. The end result is that modes that are
resonant with the streaming particles grow more slowly (black dashed line versus
red dashed line in both panels of Fig. 11) but at larger frequencies (black solid line
versus red solid line). This latter fact is potentially very interesting, because the
phase speed of the waves Re(ω)/k is in this case much larger than vA. We already
discussed in the previous section the eﬀects that the velocity of the scattering centres
might have on the particle spectra when it becomes a non-negligible fraction of the
ﬂuid velocity. For typical values of the parameters, from Eq. 26 we ﬁnd:
vφ = Re(ω)
k
=
r
3π
8Λ
vS
c ξCRvS ≈2 × 107cm s−1 
vS
109cm s−1
3
.
(30)


===== PAGE 26 =====

October 9, 2018
14:54
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Amato
26
Elena Amato
Fig. 11.
Dispersion relation for parallel waves induced by the cosmic ray streaming in a magne-
tised quasi-neutral plasma. The solid and dashed curves represent the real and imaginary part of
the frequency respectively. The upper (lower) panel refers to the left (right) hand polarised mode.
The dot-dashed (blue) curve represents the approximation in Eq. 29, while the dotted (red) curve
represents the growth rate classically assumed for the streaming instability (Eq. 16 and Eq. 26),
appropriate to describe the growth in a regime of weak current (see discussion in the text).
This speed is ≈2% of the shock speed for fast shocks (vS ≈(0.5 −1) × 109cm s−1)
and can easily lead to a 10-15 % change of the spectral index, maybe more, depend-
ing on what happens to the propagation of the waves in the downstream.
Another important feature to notice in Fig. 11 is the fact that in this regime of
strong current the modes with diﬀerent polarisation grow diﬀerently. In particular,
while the growth of the left-hand polarised mode (the one that rotates in the same
sense as positive charges in⃗B0) quickly drops at large k-vectors, where there are no
particles to excite waves resonantly, the right-hand polarised mode grows eﬃciently
especially at large wave-numbers. Indeed for k > 1/rL,0, the perturbations become
quasi-standing oscillations (Re(ω) << Im(ω)) and their growth is maximum at
kcrit = 4πJCR/(cB0),
(31)
where
Im(ω(kcrit)) = vAkcrit .
(32)
This non-resonant short wavelength mode is usually referred to as “Bell’s mode”,
since it was ﬁrst highlighted by Bell87 in 2004. Its very large growth, promising to
lead to ampliﬁed ﬁeld in the range of few 100µG, has made it the subject of much
attention in the past ten years. However, at least in principle, this mode, being very
short wavelength (the larger the CR current, the shorter the maximum growing


===== PAGE 27 =====

October 9, 2018
14:54
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Amato
The origin of Galactic Cosmic Rays
27
wavelength, see Eq. 31) is not the most promising to guarantee eﬃcient particle
scattering, and hence to lead to particle acceleration up to high energies. On the
contrary, in the short wavelength turbulence that one expects as the result of Bell’s
mode, the scattering will be rather ineﬃcient, especially at high energies, since
a scaling of the diﬀusion with p2 rather than p is expected, with p the particle
momentum. In order to understand, then, the appeal of Bell’s mode, let us consider
the level of magnetic ﬁeld ampliﬁcation that is expected based on the growth rates
found above.
The evolution of magnetic power in a CR induced precursor can be written as:
u∂F
∂x = σF ,
(33)
where σ = 2Im(ω) and F is the normalised magnetic energy density per unit loga-
rithmic band width. The magnetic power at the shock can be estimated analytically
in the test particle case, where the ﬂuid velocity in the upstream can be considered
constant (u = vS) and the particle spectrum is f(p) ∝p−4. Let us consider only
resonant modes. With the growth rate in Eq. 26, we can write
σw = π
4 Ω∗
ci
vS
vA
nres
CR
ni
.
(34)
Our goal is that of expressing the power in ampliﬁed magnetic ﬁeld as a fraction of
the total power converted into CR acceleration. In order to do so, we express nres
CR
in the above equation in terms of the CR distribution function
nres
CR = 4π p4f(p)
pres
= 4πD
vS
p4
pres
∂f
∂x
(35)
where in the last equality we have used the steady-state transport equation inte-
grated between upstream inﬁnity and the shock. If we then remember the gen-
eral expression for the parallel diﬀusion coeﬃcient as a function of F (Eq. 8),
D(p) = 4v(p)rL(p)/3πF, we ﬁnd:
σw = 8π
3
8πvA
B2
0F

p4v(p)∂f
∂x

res
,
(36)
Using this expression in Eq. 33 one ﬁnds:
∂F
∂x = 8π
3
vA
vS
8π
B2
0

p4v ∂f
∂x

res
(37)
which is easily integrated in x to lead to:
F0 = 2
Λ
vS
vA
PCR
nimv2
S
(38)
and in terms of magnetic ﬁeld at the shock, by use of Eq. 7:
δB
B0

=
r
2 vS
vA
ξCR ≈30

vS
109cm s−1
1/2 ξCR
0.1
1/2
,
(39)
where PCR and ξCR are as deﬁned in Eq. 28 with f taken at the shock position.


===== PAGE 28 =====

October 9, 2018
14:54
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Amato
28
Elena Amato
The same kind of calculations, when carried out with the modiﬁed growth rate
in Eq 26, appropriate to describe the strongly current driven regime, lead to:
δB
B0

=
8Λ
3π
c
vS
ξCR
1/4
≈2.5

vS
109cm s−1
−1/4 ξCR
0.1
1/4
.
(40)
The fact that the ampliﬁcation factor is inversely proportional to the shock
speed might suggest that in the strongly current driven regime, this instability is
more eﬀective at slow shocks, but in fact the maximum ampliﬁcation factor is easily
estimated by using the condition that, in order for this description to hold, the upper
inequality in Eq. 25 must be satisﬁed at k = 1/rL,0. When this is done, what one
ﬁnds is that the maximum achievable resonant ampliﬁcation of the ﬁeld at a shock
that is eﬃciently accelerating CRs is:
δB
B0

MAX
=
"
8
π
 Λc
3vA
2/3#1/4
ξ1/3
CR ≈5.5
ξCR
0.1
1/3
.
(41)
and this would be realised for shock speeds:
vS ≈
Λ
3
v2
Ac
ξCR
1/3
≈4 × 107cm s−1
ξCR
0.1
−1
.
(42)
These shocks are not expected to be accelerating CRs eﬀectively.
The conclusion that one is forced to draw at the end of this session is that
the vast amount of work done on the self-consistent inclusion of magnetic ﬁeld
ampliﬁcation and back reaction into the description of CR modiﬁed shocks needs
extensive revisions. The picture in which the high magnetic ﬁelds derived from
observations of SNRs40 and the acceleration of particles up to the knee energy39
could both be explained by means of the resonant streaming instability alone was
internally ﬂawed, by the assumption of a growth rate of the instability that was not
appropriate for the regime of eﬃcient acceleration.
As far as magnetic ﬁelds are concerned, if large ampliﬁcation factors are to
be achieved, the resonant streaming instability is not a viable mechanism, while
the non-resonant mode of the same instability could do the job. The growth at
kcrit of the right hand polarised mode is extremely fast in the linear phase and
leads to expect extremely high ampliﬁcation factors. The question of what is the
mechanism by which the instability saturates has been the subject of extensive
numerical study, both through MHD89,90 and PIC91,92,93 simulations, and the result
is that even the most conservative estimates give ﬁelds that easily reach 30 −100µ
G strengths for fast shocks and CR acceleration eﬃciency ξCR ≈0.1. Another
important result of these numerical investigations is the fact that the wavelength at
which the ﬁeld growth is the fastest (1/kcrit) progressively increases with increasing
ﬁeld strength, scaling with (δB/B0)2. This fact is of fundamental importance for
particle acceleration. Indeed, one of the most serious objections against the non-
resonant instability as the explanation for reaching high energy is the fact that the
wave modes that grow are too high frequency to induce eﬃcient particle scattering.


===== PAGE 29 =====

October 9, 2018
14:54
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Amato
The origin of Galactic Cosmic Rays
29
However recent developments seem to support the contrary. In the picture in which
the instability is induced by the entire population of CRs propagating in the ISM
with the shock speed, an inverse cascade by almost 10 orders of magnitude would be
needed to eﬃciently scatter particles with energy close to the knee (from a scale that
is of order 10−3 −10−2 rL,0 up to the gyro radius of PeV protons). This is very hard
to imagine, but two facts might help. First of all, the turbulence might be seeded far
from the shock by the particles escaping from the system at the maximum energy:
this would reduce kcrit by a factor pmin/pesc (see Eq. 31 and consider that the current
carried by the escaping particles for a p−4 spectrum is Jesc = JCR(pmin/pesc)) and
still lead to a fast enough growth of the perturbations. In addition, the fact that
Bell’s turbulence has a well deﬁned helicity (only right-hand polarised modes grow
eﬃciently) creates the basis for a dynamo mechanism, that then eﬀectively moves
power to larger scales94,95.
A very recent development is the appearance of numerical studies that include
particle acceleration and magnetic ﬁeld ampliﬁcation in a self-consistent way, rather
than considering the development of the instability induced by a ﬁxed current,
as was always the case in the past45,44. These studies indeed conﬁrm that in the
strongly current driven regime, the escaping particles seed the growth of small wave-
length perturbations far upstream, but close to the the shock there is considerable
power at the resonant scales.
This picture in which the escape of particles is the main source of instability
and Bell’s modes are the main source of scattering has recently led to propose
a paradigm shift: while in the standard picture of CR acceleration in SNRs the
highest energy particles were assumed to be accelerated in the early stages of the
Sedov-Taylor phase of expansion, a very recent proposal96,97 wants these particles
accelerated at a much earlier time, in the ﬁrst few years after the explosion of a
type II Supernova expanding in the dense wind of its progenitor star. According to
this paradigm Cas A could have been a PeVatron once and signatures of that time
could still be detectable with upcoming γ-ray instruments.
8. News from the optical
In the last few years a very interesting development in the quest for a ﬁnal proof of
the CR-SNR association has come from the most traditional kind of observations,
namely observations in the optical band. It is well known that several SNRs show
Balmer dominated shocks98. The Balmer Hα emission is produced when neutral
hydrogen de-excites after being excited by collisions with the hot plasma behind
the shock. When a collisionless shock propagates in a partially ionised medium, the
neutral particles are not aﬀected by the shock and therefore they acquire a velocity
and temperature diﬀerence with respect to the ionised component, which is slowed
down and heated. Due to this kinematic diﬀerence, behind the shock, the processes
of charge exchange and ionisation start to take place in a non-equilibrium situation:
this leads to Balmer emission, with a line that is usually made of two components,


===== PAGE 30 =====

October 9, 2018
14:54
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Amato
30
Elena Amato
a narrow component, associated with emission by cold neutrals that have kept their
upstream distribution, and a broad component, due to neutrals that result from a
charge-exchange reaction in the downstream (hot ions that have become neutrals)
and have an eﬀective temperature close to that of the downstream ions.
In the presence of eﬃcient CR acceleration, as we mentioned in Sec. 3, one
expects the downstream plasma temperature to be lower than the shock jump con-
ditions would predict, and hence the broad Balmer line should become narrower
than expected. At the same time, if a CR precursor develops (such as described
in Sec. 3), a velocity and temperature diﬀerence between ions and neutrals will
come about even before the shock transition. In this case charge exchange processes
will take place out of equilibrium also in the precursor, producing some heating
and slowing down of the neutrals already in the upstream. This might result in a
broader than expected narrow line (see Ref. 12for a review).
A great deal of excitement was aroused in recent years from the measurement
of an anomalous shape of the Balmer line in a couple of SNRs11,99. The authors
of the discovery interpreted their ﬁndings in terms of eﬃcient CR acceleration at
these shocks, deducing ξCR > 50% for the case of SNR RCW86. However, the
physical modelling of the system behind these interpretations was not very accu-
rate, due to the lack of a self-consistent description of a CR accelerating shock
propagating in a quasi-neutral medium. Now that such a description has ﬁnally
become available100,101,102, the inferred acceleration eﬃciencies have revised some-
what, while additional possible signatures of eﬃcient CR acceleration have been
highlighted.
The presence of neutrals upstream of the shock, not only provides a diagnostic for
the shock, thanks to Balmer emission (which, by the way, is also the only available
probe of the ion temperature behind the shock), but, even more important, aﬀects
the shock dynamics. The ﬁrst eﬀect of the presence of neutrals is the creation of
a precursor ahead of the shock even in the absence of CR acceleration. This is
due to the fact that some neutrals might undergo charge-exchange downstream
of the shock with ions that are moving towards the shock. When this happens
nothing prevents the newly formed neutrals to recross the shock and end up in
the upstream, where they might undergo another charge exchange interaction or
get ionised: this phenomenon has been called “the neutral return ﬂux”. The net
result of this sequence of processes is the deposition of energy and momentum in
the upstream, and thus the formation of a precursor. This precursor, however, is
very diﬀerent in nature from the one induced by CRs, and the main diﬀerence is
that, while in the CR precursor the compression factor increases to values larger
than the limit value of Rtot = 4, appropriate for a strong shock, in this neutral
induced precursor the compression factor is never larger than 4, and depending
on the ionisation fraction of the medium and on the shock speed, might become
appreciably less than 4 at the shock (see left panel of Fig. 12). This diﬀerence
between the two precursors, which is due to the fact that the shock stays non-
radiative in this case (no neutrals can escape the system towards upstream inﬁnity


===== PAGE 31 =====

October 9, 2018
14:54
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Amato
The origin of Galactic Cosmic Rays
31
 1.5
 2
 2.5
 3
 3.5
 4
 4.5
 1000
slope
Vshock [km/s]
ntot= 0.1 cm-3
ion fraction = 50%
B1= 10 µG
E/GeV =  1
10
100
1000
Fig. 12.
Left panel: The neutral induced precursor. The ﬂuid velocity is plotted as a function of
distance from the shock (the shock is at z=0 and the upstream is on the left). For velocity lower than
300 km s−1, the ﬂuid slows down already in the upstream. The total compression ratio, however,
is never larger than 4. Right panel: slope of the particle distribution function at diﬀerent energies
as a function of the shock speed. The plot refers to the spectrum of test particles accelerated at
a shock that propagates in a medium with density ntot = 0.1cm−3 and 50% ionisation fraction
(taken from Ref. 100).
Fig. 13.
Left panel: logarithmic plot of the normalised intensity of the Balmer line, showing the
appearance of a third line with intermediate width due to the neutral return ﬂux. The upstream
density and ionisation fraction are the same as above and the shock speed is 4000km s−1. Right
panel: how the line shape changes in the presence of eﬃcient CR acceleration. A shock with velocity
vS = 4000km s−1, ntot = 0.1cm−3 and ionisation fraction 50% is considered. The diﬀerent lines
are as speciﬁed in the ﬁgure (taken from Ref. 101).
due to ionisation losses) reﬂects in an important diﬀerence between the spectra of
accelerated particles: while the CR precursor had the eﬀect of making the spectrum
harder, the neutral precursor makes the spectrum steeper. This eﬀect is illustrated
in the right panel of Fig. 12, where the spectral index α (α = (p/f)(df/dp) where
f(p) is the particle distribution function in momentum) is plotted as a function
of the shock speed for diﬀerent particle energies, and for the plasma parameters
speciﬁed in the ﬁgure.
It is apparent that this fact might help explain the presence of steep particle
spectra in sources with shock velocities below 3000 km s−1.
The presence of a neutral return ﬂux also alters the shape of the Balmer line.


===== PAGE 32 =====

October 9, 2018
14:54
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Amato
32
Elena Amato
Hydrogen atoms that undergo charge-exchange immediately upstream of the shock
with ions that have been heated by the neutral return ﬂux give rise to a third
component of the Balmer line which is intermediate in width between the broad
and the narrow, with a typical width of ∼100 −300km s−1. This eﬀect is well
illustrated in the left panel of Fig. 13. Possible evidence for the presence of such an
intermediate line might already be present in existing data103.
The eﬀects so far discussed were in the context of a shock that is not accelerating
CRs eﬀectively. Let us now move to eﬃcient accelerators, to see how Balmer emission
can be used as a diagnostic of CR acceleration eﬃciency. A complete description
of the system can be achieved by solving the ﬂuid equations for the ﬂuid, the
transport equation for the accelerated particles and the Boltzman equation for the
neutrals, with collisions associated to charge exchange with ions and ionisation. The
steady state solution of this set of equations can be found by iteration, and all the
thermodynamical quantities, together with the distribution function of neutrals and
the spectrum of the accelerated particles can be calculated at each point in space. In
terms of Balmer emission, the presence of CRs qualitatively leads to a broadening
of the narrow and intermediate components of the line, and to a narrowing of
the broad component (see right panel of Fig. 13. Quantitatively, however, these
eﬀects depend on a number of diﬀerent parameters. The width of the narrow and
intermediate component are especially sensitive to the amount of non-adiabatic
heating (turbulent heating) in the precursor, which is a total unknown and can
only be parametrised in these calculations. The width of the broad Balmer line,
instead, while insensitive to what happens in the precursor, strongly depends on the
level of electron-ion temperature equilibration behind the shock. These eﬀects are
illustrated in Fig. 14, where we plot, in the left panel, the broadening of the narrow
line as a function of turbulent heating in the precursor, and, in the right panel, the
width of the broad component as a function of CR acceleration eﬃciency and for
two extreme hypotheses on the ratio of electron to ion temperatures downstream.
The strong dependence of the FWHM of the broad line on the ratio of electron to
proton temperature is one of the main obstacles to derive ﬁrm conclusions on the
eﬃciency of CR acceleration from observations.
This model has been applied to the two SNRs for which reliable measurements
of an anomalous shape of the broad Balmer line are available, SNR 0509-67.599,104
and SNR RCW8611. In the case of SNR 0509-67.5, observations of the SW rim (that
hosts a fast shock, with vs ≈5000 km s−1, and is the most promising site to detect
eﬃcient CR acceleration) are compatible with an eﬃciency ranging from 10% to 50%
depending on βdown (Ref. 105). If one, however, takes into account the fact that at
such fast shocks the equilibration is usually poor106, then the most likely scenario
is one in which the CR acceleration eﬃciency is at the 20-30% level105. In the
case of RCW86, an additional diﬃculty in constraining the acceleration eﬃciency
comes from the fact that the distance to this remnant is not well known, and this
reﬂects in uncertainties on the shock velocity. Depending on whether the distance
is 2 or 3 kpc, the measurements are compatible with no acceleration or acceleration


===== PAGE 33 =====

October 9, 2018
14:54
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Amato
The origin of Galactic Cosmic Rays
33
Fig. 14.
Left panel: a closeup of the shaded region in the right panel of Fig. 13 showing in more
detail the expected proﬁle of the narrow Balmer line in the absence of CRs and in the presence of
eﬃcient CR acceleration (ξCR ≈30%) but with diﬀerent levels of turbulent heating in the precur-
sor. Right panel: the width of the broad Balmer line as a function of CR acceleration eﬃciency for
two extreme assumptions on the level of electron-ion equilibration downstream (βdown = Te2/Ti2,
the ratio of electron to ion temperature). All the main parameters are speciﬁed in the ﬁgure (taken
from Ref. 102).
with eﬃciency up to 30%. However, measurements of the electron temperature are
available for this remnant, and when these are combined with Balmer emission, the
most likely scenario entails an acceleration eﬃciency of order 20%107. It might seem
striking that in both cases the acceleration eﬃciency seems to be above the average
implied for SNRs as CR factories (≈10%). However, it should be kept in mind that
these estimates refer, as the measurements of Hα emission do, to small sections of
the shock surface. Indeed, recent work using high spatial and spectral resolution
observation of Balmer emission108 has highlighted that SNR shocks can be highly
dishomogeneous.
Further progress is promising to come from detailed modelling of other remnants
that show anomalous Balmer emission (e.g. narrow line so broad as to imply a
temperature of the upstream plasma incompatible with partial ionization). However,
given the complex interplay between the diﬀerent parameters, in order to achieve
reliable conclusions, a combination of optical observations with X-ray observations
aimed at measuring the electron temperature is likely what is needed.
9. News from CR observations from Earth
Direct observations of CRs in recent years have also brought about very intriguing
results, concerning both hadronic and leptonic CRs. We brieﬂy illustrate a few of
them in the following together with the proposed explanations.
9.1. Spectral breaks
An important result found by the PAMELA satellite is the hardening of both the
proton and He spectra at a rigidity (energy divided by electric charge) of about
230 GV16. In addition, the spectrum of He nuclei is always harder than that of


===== PAGE 34 =====

October 9, 2018
14:54
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Amato
34
Elena Amato
protons: the slope of the proton spectrum below 230 GeV is γ1,p = 2.85±0.015 and
changes to γ2,p = 2.67±0.03 above that energy; the slope of He is γ1,He = 2.77±0.01
below 230 GeV/n and changes to γ2,He = 2.48 ± 0.06 above. These results seem to
conﬁrm, with a much better statistics, previous ﬁndings by CREAM109 that showed
the spectra of proton and He to be diﬀerent and also that all nuclear species present
a spectral hardening at around 200 GeV/n.
The detection of a hardening around 200 GeV/n for all elements is very intrigu-
ing especially because that is about the energy at which according to calculations47
dating as far back as the ’70s, the regime in which CRs propagate changes: in
particular, while at energies lower than about 100 GeV CRs are numerous enough
to generate the waves that scatter them, at higher energies, this is not the case,
and propagation is expected to occur in turbulence of a diﬀerent origin and with a
diﬀerent spectrum.
It is generally believed that the main source of turbulence in the Galaxy are SN
explosions, which inject the turbulence at a scale of about 50-100 pc. This turbulence
then cascades to smaller scales and a commonly (though not universally) accepted
description of the cascading process is provided by Non-Linear-Landau-Damping
with coeﬃcients such as to produce a Kolmogorov’s spectrum: F(k) ∝k−5/3, where
F(k) is deﬁned as in Eq. 7. At any scale, the evolution of the turbulence will be
described by an equation of the form:
∂
∂k

Dkk
∂W
∂k

+ ΓCRW = qw(k)
(43)
where Dkk ∝vAk7/2(kF(k))1/2 (see Ref. 110), ΓCR is given by Eq. 16 and qw(k) is a
source term in the form of a Dirac δ at kout ≈(100pc)−1. An analytical estimate of
the transition scale between the dominance of CR induced turbulence and general
MHD turbulence in the Galaxy can be obtained by equating the non-linear damping
rate ΓNL = Dkk/k2 to the growth rate of CR induced turbulence ΓCR.
Using in the expression of ΓCR the CR spectrum observed by PAMELA at
energies above a few hundred GeV, one obtains that the transition must occur at a
scale equal to the Larmor radius of particles with energy:
Etr = 228GeV
 
R2
d,10H−1/3
3
ξ0.1E51R30
!
3
2(γp−4)
B(2γp−5)/2(γp−4)
0,µ
,
(44)
where Rd,10 and H3 are the radius of the Galactic disk and halo in units of 10
and 3 kpc respectively, ξ0.1 is the CR acceleration eﬃciency per SNR in tens of
percent, E51 is the SN explosion energy in units of 1051 erg and R30 is the SN rate
in units of 1/(30yr); B0,µ is the average strength of the Galactic magnetic ﬁeld in
µG and ﬁnally γp is the observed particle spectral index (in momentum) at energies
above 300 GeV (from PAMELA data γp = 4.67). The turbulence spectrum will be
dominated by CR induced turbulence at scales smaller than λ ≈rL(Etr) ≈1015
cm and by external turbulence at large scales. As a result the diﬀusion coeﬃcient
will change its energy dependence around that energy. At larger energies the scaling


===== PAGE 35 =====

October 9, 2018
14:54
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Amato
The origin of Galactic Cosmic Rays
35
Fig. 15.
Left panel: the proton spectrum computed based on this model compared with
PAMELA data (grey circles) and with the CR spectrum deduced from observations of nearby
clouds111(shaded area). Right panel: the predicted B/C ratio as a function of energy per nucleon
compared with available data as speciﬁed in the ﬁgure.
will be Kolmogorov’s: F(k) ∝k−2/3, and hence D(p) ∝E1/3 (see Eqs. 7 and 8). At
lower energies the solution of the coupled equations for the evolution of turbulence
and particle transport gives a stronger energy dependence. As a consequence, for
a given slope of the particle spectrum injected by the sources, γinj, the diﬀuse CR
spectrum ∝E−γinj−δe (see Eq. 19) will be steeper at low energies and then ﬂatten
at energies around Etr.
This very simple model was shown to account reasonably well for PAMELA
observations and also for the CR spectrum deduced from observation of nearby
clouds111,112, as shown in the left panel of Fig. 15. While in the original version of the
model, only the contribution of protons was taken into account for the production
of waves, in a follow up work113 all the most abundant nuclear species were taken
into account for wave generation and the propagated spectra of both primaries and
secondaries were compared with the available data. The right panel of Fig. 15 shows
the impressive agreement between the calculated and observed B/C ratio: this is
especially important, given the role of JB/JC as a primary probe of the energy
dependence of the diﬀusion coeﬃcient, as we already mentioned in Sec. 5.
Two important points must be mentioned before concluding this session.
First of all, it should be mentioned that the break detected by PAMELA in the
proton spectrum, while in agreement with most previous measurements, does not
seem to be conﬁrmed by AMS-02. However, at present, the AMS-02 collaboration
has not published its results yet, but rather only presented them at the International
Cosmic Ray Conference 2013 and published them on their web site114, so it is
diﬃcult to comment on this issue. What can be safely said is that a transition
between two diﬀerent scattering regimes is something that one expected for CRs to
occur, and a spectral break pointing it out could also be expected.
Finally, one important remark is that while the mechanism we have been dis-
cussing can explain the spectral hardening of the diﬀerent chemicals, it certainly
cannot explain why the spectrum of He should be harder than the spectrum of
protons. At present, the only available explanation for this observation is based on


===== PAGE 36 =====

October 9, 2018
14:54
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Amato
36
Elena Amato
preferential injection of He in the acceleration mechanism115. Such an eﬀect might
be induced by the fact that particles are more easily injected in the acceleration pro-
cess if they are not trapped by Alfv´en waves, and the latter, being mainly produces
by protons (the most abundant specie), are less eﬃcient at trapping He.
9.2. Leptonic CRs
Another extremely interesting result obtained by the PAMELA satellite is the
clear detection of a rising positron fraction at energies from a few GeV through
100 GeV17. This result has also been conﬁrmed, with even higher statistics, by
AMS-02116. Let us see why it is so interesting.
The positron fraction is deﬁned as χ = Φe+/(Φe+ + Φe−), where Φe+ and Φe−
are the ﬂuxes of positrons and electrons respectively. While CR electrons can be
either primaries (accelerated in the same sources as for protons) or secondaries,
CR positrons are secondaries, namely resulting from CR interactions during their
propagation through the Galaxy, and associated to the production and decay of
charged pions. In this case, by following a reasoning analogous to that illustrated
for secondary nuclei in Sec. 5 (made only slightly more complicated by the fact that
losses are now important), it is possible to demonstrate that the positron fraction
must decrease with energy117. Therefore the fact that it increases is suggestive of
the existence of a source of positrons. An intriguing suggestion immediately made
after this discovery was that these extra positrons could come from dark matter
annihilation in the Galaxy (see Ref. 118for a recent review). In this case, however,
one would also expect a contribution in terms of antiprotons and therefore also the
ratio of antiproton to proton ﬂuxes (Φ¯p/Φp) should be aﬀected. This is not observed:
Φ¯p/Φp does not show any anomaly and perfectly agrees with the expectation of
standard propagation theory. While a dark matter related origin of the rise of χ is
diﬃcult to rule out completely117, astrophysical explanations seem favoured at the
current time. The most natural place where to look for a source of extra positrons is
the magnetosphere of a strongly magnetised, fast spinning neutron star, that may or
may not show up as pulsar. Young pulsars (up to several tens of thousands of years
ages) are often observed to be surrounded by non-thermal nebulae, Pulsar Wind
Nebulae (PWNe in the following). These nebulae arise from the interaction of the
pulsar wind with the surrounding medium, either the parent supernova remnant, or,
in some cases, the ISM. And it is indeed from observations of PWNe that we have
direct evidence that copious production of electron-positron pairs must be occurring
in the magnetosphere of the parent pulsar119.
The standard picture of a PWN (see e.g. Ref. 120for a recent review) is indeed
as follows. The parent neutron star can be considered a conducting magnetic dipole,
whose rotation induces a strong electric ﬁeld in the surroundings. At the star surface
the electric force acting on a charged particle is much stronger than gravity and leads
to the extraction of electrons (also protons may potentially be extracted, but the
situation there is less clear, due to the poorly known structure of the star crust).


===== PAGE 37 =====

October 9, 2018
14:54
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Amato
The origin of Galactic Cosmic Rays
37
These electrons are accelerated to relativistic energies in regions where unscreened
electric ﬁeld parallel to the local magnetic ﬁeld exists. This causes γ-ray emission,
either through curvature radiation of the accelerating charges or through Inverse
Compton scattering on the thermal photons emitted by the star. Photons with
energies above 1 MeV in the intense ambient magnetic ﬁeld are above the threshold
for pair production, and a large number of pairs is produced for each primary
electron extracted from the star. These pairs are thought to leave the magnetosphere
with a Lorentz factor of about 100, and become part of a relativistic outﬂow that
carries most of the rotational energy lost by the star. Conﬁnement of this magnetised
pair wind by the surrounding medium gives rise to a shock propagating outward in
the conﬁning medium, and to a reverse shock that propagates towards the pulsar up
to a distance such that the ram pressure of the outﬂow is equal to the pressure of the
shocked material downstream. At this termination shock particles are accelerated
very eﬃciently and then they form the bright non-thermal nebulae that we observe
from the radio through the γ-ray band, due to synchrotron and Inverse Compton
emission.
While the PWN phenomenology is a very interesting topic in itself (suﬃce it to
say that these are the only sources in which we have direct evidence of PeV parti-
cles), for the purpose of the present discussion, what is relevant are the properties
of low-energy, radio emitting particles. These have energies in the range between 1
GeV and 1 TeV and a very ﬂat spectrum, with slope between 1 and 1.5. A source
of positrons with a ﬂat spectrum is exactly what is needed to reproduce the rising
positron fraction observed by PAMELA and AMS-02.
When wondering whether these pairs can be responsible for the rising positron
fraction, the ﬁrst concern appears to be the mechanism that allows their escape
from the cage that conﬁnes them in the PWN. Their Larmor radii in the nebular
magnetic ﬁelds (of strength around a few 100 µG) are very small and diﬀusive escape
is not eﬀective. However, pulsars are a population of objects with very high proper
motion121, with a peak around a velocity VPSR ≈400 −500km s−1. Therefore, they
are expected to leave the parent remnant at a time tesc that can be estimated as
VPSRtesc = RST(tesc/tST)2/5, assuming that the remnant is expanding in the Sedov-
Taylor phase (see Sec. 2). For pulsars in the peak of the velocity distribution, one
obtains tesc ≈40 −50 kyr. Indeed, pulsars with ages of tens of kyr are observed
to form Pulsar Bow Shock Nebulae, namely nebulae where the conﬁnement of the
pulsar wind is provided by the ISM, in which the star supersonic motion produces
a bow shock.
The study of Bow Shock PWNe provides us with precious information about the
particle release by such systems. First of all, we know from direct observations that
the spectra of radio emitting particles, even in these older systems, are extremely
similar to those observed in their younger counterparts122,123: N(E) ∝E−γe with
γe ≈1.5. The high energy part of the spectrum is also similar to that observed
in PWNe inside SNRs122. From the estimated value of the magnetic ﬁeld we also
know that radio emission is due to particles with energies between 1 GeV and 1


===== PAGE 38 =====

October 9, 2018
14:54
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Amato
38
Elena Amato
TeV, and that these particles have a ﬂat energy spectrum. In addition, numerical
simulations124 support the idea that these low energy particles can easily escape
from the system along the tail, with very little energy losses.
If we believe then that all the particles with energies up to 1TeV produced after
a pulsar has left its parent SNR are released in the ISM with negligible losses, the
main unknown we are left with in the quest for understanding whether pulsars can
contribute appreciably to the positron excess, is Eres, namely the fraction of the
pulsar initial rotational energy that is still available for particle acceleration after a
time tesc. This critical quantity depends on how the pulsar spins down. In general,
one can write the spin-down law as ˙Ω∝Ωn, with n the so-called braking index, and
Ωand ˙Ωthe star rotation frequency and its derivative respectively. For a spinning
dipole one expects n = 3, since ˙E = IΩ˙Ω∝B2
∗Ω4, where ˙E is the star’s energy
loss, I its momentum of inertia and B∗the surface magnetic ﬁeld. However, the
problem is that for the few cases in which the braking index has actually been
measured, its value has always been found to be less than 3, with an average of 2.5.
At the same time, while the surface magnetic ﬁeld is typically found to be of order
a few × 1012G, the distribution of initial spin periods is not well constrained.
Keeping in mind all these unknowns, it is still worth considering what comes
out in terms of electrons and positrons from the simplest possible calculation125,
namely one that considers all pulsars being born with a 1012G surface magnetic ﬁeld
and a spin period of 20 ms (values close to those appropriate for the Crab pulsar),
and leaving their parent remnant 40 kyr after birth. The spectrum of electrons and
positrons at Earth is computed through a Green function approach, assuming that
SNRs and pulsars are born at a rate of 1/(30 yr) and are distributed in the Galaxy
according to the results of Ref. 126. Fig. 16 shows the results of such a calculation,
both in terms of the total ﬂux of leptons, which is compared with Fermi data in the
left panel, and for the positron fraction, which is compared with PAMELA data on
the right. This very simple model is clearly able to reproduce the data very well,
assuming that after leaving the remnant our model pulsar releases about 20% of its
rotational energy in the form of pairs with energies between 1 GeV and 1 TeV.
An important probe of this model is in the level of predicted anisotropy: since,
due to losses, the number of contributing sources, strongly decreases as a function
of energy, with only a handful of sources contributing TeV leptons, an anisotropy at
the 1% level is predicted around this energy. Present day AMS-02 upper limits are
at the 3% level at an energy of 350 GeV. With more data, the level of anisotropy
expected from models based on the pulsar origin of the excess positrons might be
detectable.
10. Conclusions
In the last decade, there have been many important developments in the quest for
understanding the origin of Galactic CRs. I have tried to review a few of them in
this article. The most striking news have come from observations. Looking at SNRs


===== PAGE 39 =====

October 9, 2018
14:54
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Amato
The origin of Galactic Cosmic Rays
39
Fig. 16.
Left panel: Spectrum of electrons from SNRs (solid line) and electrons and positrons
from pulsar winds (dashed line). The thick solid line through the Fermi data points is the sum
of the two. Right panel: Positron ratio compared with the PAMELA data points. Figure from
Ref. 125.
with X-ray and γ-ray telescopes, we have seen the ﬁrst unequivocal detection of
relativistic protons and collected evidence for the presence of large magnetic ﬁelds,
able to guarantee in principle acceleration up to the knee. We might even have seen
a remnant accelerating particles up to 1/2 PeV (Tycho), but some modelling is
required to extract this information from the data and hence we cannot state this
with absolute certainty, especially in the presence of the loose ends that are still
there in the theory. Indeed the recent γ-ray data have also shown some discrepancies
with respect to the theoretical expectations.
The last decade has been very active also on the theory side: the Non-Linear
Theory of Diﬀusive Shock acceleration has become a fully developed framework
for the description of a shock that is accelerating particles eﬃciently, with the
progressive inclusion of all main sources of non-linearity of the problem, the back
reaction of accelerated particles on the shock, the ampliﬁcation of magnetic ﬁelds
through instabilities induced by the accelerated particles and the back reaction of
these ﬁelds on the system. The main diﬃculties that the theory currently faces are
related to two pieces of evidence: 1) the observation in γ-ray emitting remnants
of spectra that are systematically steeper than E−2; 2) the conclusion reached,
through a combination of observations and calculations of CR propagation in the
Galaxy, that CR sources must inject in the Galaxy a spectrum steeper than E−2. A


===== PAGE 40 =====

October 9, 2018
14:54
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Amato
40
Elena Amato
promising way of accommodating these two pieces of evidence within the NLDSA
theory is by redeﬁnition of the velocity of the scattering centres with inclusion
of the modiﬁed Alfv´en speed, namely the Alfv´en speed in the ampliﬁed magnetic
ﬁeld. Presently, this can only be done in a phenomenological way, in the absence
of the necessary information on the properties of the relevant magnetic turbulence.
However, the recent appearance in the literature of the ﬁrst hybrid simulations of
non-relativistic shock waves holds the promise of providing us with this information
soon, together with new insights on another process that is currently treated in
a phenomenological way, namely that of particle injection into the acceleration
mechanism.
In very recent times, the theory of NLDSA has been extended to shock propa-
gating in partially ionised plasmas, where the non-thermal diagnostics can be sup-
plemented by optical spectroscopy looking for anomalies in the Balmer line proﬁles
that could be associated to eﬃcient particle acceleration. Interestingly enough, it is
exactly this method that has allowed us to ﬁnd the best evidence so far of a SNR,
RCW86, that is accelerating CRs with very high eﬃciency, of order 30%.
In conclusion, in terms of proving the CR-SNR association, in the last few years
we have really made important progress, collecting evidence of eﬃcient acceleration
of particles in SNRs, and seeing that these are not only electrons but also protons.
One issue that cannot be considered as settled is that of the maximum achievable
energy in SNRs, and the end of the Galactic CR spectrum. It is likely that the ﬁnal
word on the subject will have to wait the CTA era.
Aside from long standing questions, observational progress constantly provides
us with new puzzles: two recent instances are the detection of spectral hardenings
of basically all nuclear species at around 200 GeV/n and of a ﬂatter spectrum of
He with respect to protons. While the former ﬁnds a possible simple explanation in
the eﬀect of self-generated waves during CR propagation in the Galaxy, no simple
explanation is currently available for the latter, which really stays as a big mystery.
Finally, while we concluded that the SNR paradigm for the origin of CRs is in
good shape, observations of the positron excess seem to require some extra source
to intervene at energies well below 1 PeV to guarantee an extra input of relativistic
leptons in the Galaxy. It is interesting to observe that if the pulsar origin of the
excess discussed in this review will be conﬁrmed, then all the sources so far needed
of Galactic CRs would still be in the realm of stellar remnants.
Acknowledgments
I am deeply grateful to Pasquale Blasi, for reading and commenting this manuscript,
but even more for our long-term collaboration on this subject. I also want to thank
Damiano Caprioli and Giovanni Morlino, with whom I have enjoyied collaborating
on Cosmic Ray physics for several years.


===== PAGE 41 =====

October 9, 2018
14:54
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Amato
The origin of Galactic Cosmic Rays
41
References
1. Pacini D., Il Nuovo Cimento, 3, 93 (1912) Translated and commented in A. de Angelis
(2010). ”Penetrating Radiation at the Surface of and in Water”.
2. Baade W., Zwicky F., Phys. Rev., 46, 76 (1934)
3. Ginzburg V.L., Syrovatsky S.I., Prog Theor Phys Suppl, 20, 1 (1961)
4. Krymskii G.F., Dokl Akad Nauk SSSR, 234, 1306 (1977)
5. Blandford R. D. , Ostriker J. P., ApJ Letters, 221, 29 (1978)
6. Bell A. R., MNRAS, 182, 147 (1978a)
7. Bell A. R., MNRAS, 182, 443 (1978b)
8. Blasi P., A&A Reviews, 21, 70 (2013)
9. Ballet J., Adv. Space Res., 37, 1902 (2006)
10. Vink J., Astron Astrophys Rev, 20, 49 (2012)
11. Helder E. A., Vink J., Bassa C. G., et al., Science, 325, 719 (2009)
12. Heng K., Publ Astron Soc Aust, 27, 23 (2010)
13. Tavani M., et al., AGILE collaboration, ApJ Letters, 710, 151 (2010)
14. Ackermann M., et al, Fermi Collaboration, Science, 339, 807 (2013)
15. Ahn H. S., et al., CREAM collaboration, ApJ Letters, 714, 89 (2010)
16. Adriani O., et al., PAMELA collaboration, Science, 332, 69 (2011)
17. Adriani O., et al., PAMELA collaboration, Nature, 458, 607 (2009)
18. Zweibel E., Phys. Plasmas, 20, 055501 (2013)
19. Fermi E., Phys. Rev., 75, 1169 (1949)
20. Fermi E., Astrophys. J., 119, 1 (1954)
21. Drury L. O’C., Rep. Prog. Phys., 46, 973 (1983)
22. Blandford R., Eichler D., Phys. Rep., 154, 1 (1987)
23. Matthaeus W. H., Qin G., Bieber J. W., Zank G. P., ApJ Letters, 590, 53 (2003)
24. Lagage P. O., Cesarsky C. J., Astron Astrophys, bf 125, 249 (1983)
25. Drury L. OC., V¨olk H. J., ApJ, 248, 344 (1981)
26. Berezhko E. G., Yelshin V. K., Ksenofontov L. T., Astropart. Phys., 2, 215 (1994)
27. Berezhko E. G., V¨olk H. J., Astropart. Phys, 7, 183 (1997)
28. Berezhko E. G., V¨olk H. J., A&A, 357, 283 (2000)
29. Ellison D. C., Eichler D., ApJ, 286, 691 (1984)
30. Knerr J. M., Jokipii J. R., Ellison D. C., ApJ, 458, 641 (1996)
31. Kang H., Jones T. W., ApJ, 476, 875 (1997)
32. Berezhko E. G., V¨olk H. J., ApJ, 611, 12 (2004)
33. V¨olk H. J., Berezhko E. G., Ksenofontov L. T., A&A, 433, 229 (2005)
34. Vladimirov A. E., Bykov A. M., Ellison D. C., ApJ, 688, 1084 (2008)
35. Vladimirov A. E., Bykov A. M., Ellison D. C., ApJ Letters, 703, 29 (2009)
36. Blasi P., Astropart. Phys., 16, 429 (2002)
37. Amato E., Blasi P., MNRAS Letters, 364, 76 (2005)
38. Amato E., Blasi P., MNRAS, 371, 1251 (2006)
39. Blasi P., Amato E., Caprioli D., MNRAS, 375, 1471 (2007)
40. Caprioli D., Blasi P., Amato E., Vietri M., ApJ Letters, 679, 139 (2008)
41. Caprioli D., Blasi P. Amato E., MNRAS, 396, 2065 (2009a)
42. Caprioli D., Blasi P., Amato E., Vietri M., MNRAS, 395, 895 (2009b)
43. Blasi P., Gabici S., Vannoni G., MNRAS, 361, 907 (2005)
44. Caprioli D., Spitkovsky A., ApJ, 783, 91 (2014)
45. Caprioli D., Spitkovksy A., ApJ Letters, 765, 20 (2013)
46. McKenzie J. F., V¨olk H. J., A&A, 116, 191 (1982)
47. Wentzel D. G., Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics, 12, 71 (1974)
48. Amenomori M., et al., Tibet collaboration, ApJ Letters, 626, 29 (2005)


===== PAGE 42 =====

October 9, 2018
14:54
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Amato
42
Elena Amato
49. Zweibel E. G., in Arons J., McKee C., Max C., eds, AIP Conf. Ser., 56, 319 (1979)
50. Caprioli D., Amato E., Blasi P., Astropart. Phys., 33, 307 (2010)
51. Caprioli D., Amato E., Blasi P., Astropart. Phys., 33, 160 (2010)
52. Warren J. S., Hughes J. P., Badenes C., Ghavamian P., et al., ApJ, 634, 376 (2005)
53. Cassam-Chena¨ı G., Hughes J. P., Ballet J., Decourchelle A., ApJ, 665, 315 (2007)
54. Reynolds S. P., Ellison D., ApJ Letters, 399, 75 (1992)
55. Morlino G., Blasi P., Bandiera R., Amato E., A&A, 562, 141 (2014)
56. Morlino G., Caprioli D., A&A, 538, 81 (2012)
57. Uchiyama Y., Aharonian F., Tanaka T., Takahashi T., Maeda Y., Nature, 449, 576
(2007)
58. Bykov A. M., Ellison D. C., Renaud M., Space Science Reviews, 166, 71 (2012)
59. Schure K. M., Bell A. R., Drury L. O., Bykov A. M., Space Science Rev., 173, 491
(2012)
60. Giacalone J., Jokipii J. R., ApJ Letters, 663, 41 (2007)
61. Aharonian F., et al., HESS collaboration, Nature, 432, 75 (2004)
62. Morlino G., Amato E., Blasi P., MNRAS, 392, 240 (2009)
63. Berezhko E. G., V¨olk H. J., A&A, 492, 695 (2008)
64. Ellison D. C., Patnaude D. J., Slane P., Raymond J., ApJ, 712, 287 (2010)
65. Abdo A. A., et al., Fermi collaboration, ApJ, 734, 28 (2011)
66. Abdo A. A., et al., Fermi collaboration, Science, 327, 1103 (2010)
67. Giuliani A., et al., AGILE collaboration, ApJ Letters, 742, 30 (2011)
68. Tavani M., et al., AGILE collaboration, ApJ Letters, 710, 151 (2010)
69. Abdo A. A., Fermi collaboration, ApJ, 712, 459 (2010)
70. Cardillo M., Tavani M., Giuliani A., Yoshiike S., et al., arXiv1403.1250 (2014)
71. Zirakashvili V. N., Aharonian F. A., Yang R., Ona-Wilhelmi E., Tuﬀs R. J.,
arXiv1308.3742 (2013)
72. Maurin D., Melot F., Taillet R., arXiv1302.5525 (2013)
73. Ahn H. S., et al., CREAM collaboration, Astroparticle Phys., 30, 133 (2008)
74. Vladimirov A. E., J´ohannesson G., Moskalenko I. V., Porter T. A., ApJ, 752, 68
(2012)
75. Gaggero D., Maccione L., Di Bernardo G., Evoli C., Grasso D., arXiv1306.6850 (2013)
76. Ptuskin V. S., Jones F. C., Seo E. S., Sina R., Adv. Space Res., 37, 1909 (2006)
77. Blasi P., Amato E., JCAP, 01, 010 (2012)
78. Blasi P. Amato E., JCAP, 01, 011 (2012)
79. H¨orandel J. R., Astropart. Phys., 21, 241 (2004)
80. Sveshnikova L. G., Strelnikova O. N., Ptuskin V. S., Astropart. Phys., 50, 33 (2013)
81. Caprioli D., Astrpart. Phys., 05, 026 (2011)
82. Zirakashvili V. N., Ptuskin V. S., High Energy Gamma-Ray Astronomy, AIP Confer-
ence Proceedings, 1085, 336 (2008)
83. Caprioli D., Astropart. Phys., 07, 038 (2012)
84. Krall N. A., Trivelpiece A. W., Principles of Plasma Physics, McGraw-Hill, New York,
p. 249 (1973)
85. Achterberg A., A&A, 119, 274 (1983)
86. Zweibel E. G., ApJ, 587, 625 (2003)
87. Bell A. R., MNRAS, 353, 550 (2004)
88. Amato E., Blasi P., MNRAS, 392, 1591 (2009)
89. Bell A. R., MNRAS, 358, 181 (2005)
90. Zirakashvili V. N., Ptuskin V. S., V¨olk H. J., ApJ, 678, 255 (2008)
91. Niemiec J., Pohl M., Stroman T., Nishikawa K.I., ApJ, 684, 1174 (2008)
92. Riquelme M. A., Spitkovsky A., ApJ, 694, 626 (2009)


===== PAGE 43 =====

October 9, 2018
14:54
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Amato
The origin of Galactic Cosmic Rays
43
93. Ohira Y., Reville B., Kirk J. G., Takahara F., ApJ, 698, 445 (2009)
94. Bykov A. M., Osipov S. M., Ellison D. C.,MNRAS, 410, 39 (2011)
95. Bykov A. M., Brandenburg A., Malkov M. A., Osipov S. M., Space Science Rev., 178,
201 (2013)
96. Schure K. M., Bell A. R., MNRAS, 435, 1174 (2013)
97. Bell A. R., Schure K. M., Reville B., Giacinti G., MNRAS, 431, 415 (2013)
98. Chevalier R. A., Raymond J. C., ApJ Letters, 225, 27 (1978)
99. Helder E. A., Kosenko D., Vink J., ApJ Letters, 719, 140 (2010)
100. Blasi P., Morlino G., Bandiera R., Amato E., Caprioli D., ApJ, 755, 121 (2012)
101. Morlino G., Bandiera R., Blasi P., Amato E., ApJ, 760, 137 (2012)
102. Morlino G., Blasi P., Bandiera R., Amato E. A&A, 558, 25 (2013)
103. Ghavamian P., Raymond J., Hartigan P., Blair W. P.,ApJ, 535, 266 (2000)
104. Helder E. A., Kosenko D., Vink J., ApJ Letters, 737, 46 (2011)
105. Morlino G., Blasi P., Bandiera R., Amato E., A&A, 557, 142 (2013)
106. Ghavamian P., Laming J. M., Rakowski C. E., ApJ Letteres, 654, 69 (2007)
107. Morlino G., Blasi P., Bandiera R., Amato E., A&A 562,141 (2014)
108. Nikolic S., van de Ven G., Heng K., Kupko D., et al., Science, 340, 45 (2013)
109. Ahn H. S., et al., CREAM collaboration, ApJ Letters, 714, 89 (2010)
110. Blasi P., Amato E., Serpico P. D., Phys. Rev. Letters, 109, 61101 (2012)
111. Neronov A., Semikoz D. V., Taylor A. M., Phys. Rev. Letters, 108, 1105 (2012).
112. Kachelriess M., Ostapchenko S., Phys. Rev. D, 86, 3004 (2012)
113. Aloisio R., Blasi P., JCAP, 7, 001 (2013)
114. http://www.ams02.org/2013/07/new-results-from-ams-presented-at-icrc-2013/
115. Malkov M. A., Diamond P. H., R. Z. Sagdeev R. Z., Phys. Rev. Letters, 108, 081104
(2012)
116. Aguilar M., et al., AMS-02 collaboration, Phys. Rev. Letters, 110, 141102 (2013)
117. Serpico P. D., Astropart. Phys., 39, 2 (2012)
118. Fan Y. Z., Zhang B., Chang J., Int. J. Mod. Phys. D, 19, 2011 (2010)
119. Bucciantini N., Arons J., Amato E., MNRAS, 410, 381 (2011)
120. Amato E., IJMPS, 28, 60160 (2014)
121. Arzoumanian Z., ChernoﬀD. F., Cordes J. M., ApJ, 568, 2 (2002)
122. Ng C.-Y., Gaensler B. M., Chatterjee S., Johnston S., ApJ, 712, 596 (2010)
123. Yusef-Zadeh F., Gaenlser B.M., Advances in Space Res., 35,1129 (2005)
124. Bucciantini N., Amato E., Del Zanna L., A&A, 434, 189 (2005)
125. Blasi P., Amato E., High-Energy Emission from Pulsars and their Systems, Astro-
physics and Space Science Proceedings, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, p. 624 (2011)
126. Faucher-Gigu`ere C. A., Kaspi V. M., ApJ, 643, 332 (2006)
