Rep. Prog. Phys., Vol. 46, pp. 973-1027, 1983. Printed in Great Britain

An introduction to the theory of diffusive shock
acceleration of energetic particles in tenuous plasmas

L O'C Drury

Max-Planck-Institut fur Kernphysik, Postfach 103980, D6900 Heidelberg-1, West Germany

Abstract

The central idea of diffusive shock acceleration is presented from microscopic and
macroscopic viewpoints; applied to reactionless test particles in a steady plane shock
the mechanism is shown to produce a power law spectrum in momentum with a slope
which, to lowest order in the ratio of plasma to particle speed, depends only on the
compression in the shock. The associated time scale is found (also by a macroscopic
and a microscopic method) and the problems of spherical shocks, as exemplified by
a point explosion and a stellar-wind terminator, are treated by singular perturbation
theory. The effect of including the particle reaction is then studied. It is shown that
if the scattering is due to resonant waves these can rapidly grow with unknown
consequences. The possible steady modified shock structures are classified and gen-
eralised Rankine-Hugoniot conditions found. Modifications of the spectrum are
discussed on the basis of an exact, if rather artificial, solution, a high-energy asymptotic
expansion and a perturbation expansion due to Blandford. It is pointed out that no
steady solution can exist for very strong shocks; the possible time dependence is briefly
discussed.

This article was received in its present form in February 1983.

@ 1983 The Institute of Physics  973
974  L O'CDrury

Contents                                                Page

1. Introduction                                          975
2. Basic theory                                          976
                                                         976
   2.1. Transport of energetic charged particles         978
   2.2. Shock kinematics and scatter-free acceleration   982
   2.3. Diffusive acceleration at shocks                 987
3. Linear modifications                                  987
   3.1. Oblique shocks                                   99 1
    3.2. Time-dependent solutions                        995
   3.3. Non-planar shocks                               1000
    3.4. Additional energy gains and losses             1001
                                                        1001
   3.5. Effects of higher order in (V/u)                1002
                                                        1003
4. Non-linear modifications                             1014
    4.1. Self-induced scattering                        1022
    4.2. Shock structure                                1023
   4.3. Non-linear effects on the particle spectrum     1024
    4.4. Injection and selective acceleration           1025
    4.5. Pressure divergence in non-linear shocks

5 . Concluding remarks
    References
An introduction to the theory of diffusive shock acceleration  975

1. Introduction

The subject of this review is a mechanism, basically simple, whereby shock waves in
tenuous ionised media such as fill interstellar and interplanetary space can accelerate
energetic charged particles. While of interest in itself the idea's chief attraction is
that it may be a first step towards understanding the universal acceleration mechanism
long suspected by workers in high-energy astrophysics to exist and to be responsible
for the galactic cosmic rays and the energetic electrons inferred in many non-thermal
radio sources (the main evidence is that all the particle energy spectra seem to be
power laws with very similar indices). As sometimes happens in the history of Science
the concept appears to have been `in the air' and was independently and almost
contemporaneously published by Krymsky (1977), Axford et a1 (1977), Bell (1978a, b)
and Blandford and Ostriker (1978). Even prior to these four semirial papers which
all, but with interesting variations, describe the same basic process of diffusive shock
acceleration (also known as first-order or regular Fermi acceleration by shock waves)
certain papers clearly foreshadowed the concept; thus Hoyle (1960),without specifying
a mechanism, postulated that shocks could efficiently accelerate particles, Parker
(1958) and Hudson (1965, 1967) attempted to obtain a first-order Fermi mechanism
based on pairs of converging shocks and most notably Schatzman (1963) constructed
a theory very similar to diffusive shock acceleration but based on perpendicular shocks.
The idea is also implicit in the papers of Jokipii (1966, 1968), Fisk (1971) and Scholer
and Morfill (1975).

    In the six years since its first publication the concept has been considerably
elaborated and is already the subject of reviews by Blandford (1979), Axford
(1980, 1981a, b) and Toptyghin (1980). This review deals exclusively with the theo-
retical aspects of the mechanism; the relevant observational data as well as much
theoretical background can be found in the monograph by Longair (1981) and in the
volumes of conference proceedings containing Blandford's (1979) and Axford's (1980)
reviews. Virtually all work in this area has been reported (and criticised) at the
biannual international cosmic-ray conferences (the last three were at Plovdiv in 1977,
Kyoto in 1979 and Paris in 1981);the published proceedings are an invaluable guide
to current research and contain discussions of the mechanism's application to the
acceleration of the galactic cosmic rays (cf in particular the incisive criticism by
Ginzburg and Ptuskin (1981)). The theses of Achterberg (1981) and Ellison (1981)
are also useful sources.

    A shock wave, or briefly a shock, can be generally defined as a transition layer
which propagates through a plasma and changes its state. The physically important
case, and the only one considered here, is where the shock compresses the plasma
and some of the kinetic energy of the incoming plasma is transferred to internal
degrees of freedom of the downstream plasma. The thickness of the transition layer
(the shock front) is determined by the physical process responsible for this energy
conversion. In an ordinary gas shock the energy is transferred by two-body collisions
to the random thermal motion of the gas molecules and the thickness is of the order
of a few collisional mean free paths. However, in tenuous plasmas collisions are rare
and the energy transfer proceeds through collective electromagnetic effects; thus the
976                L O'CDrury

thickness of these collisionless shocks is of the order of the gyroradius of a thermal
ion (or the Debye length if electrostatic effects are important). An energetic charged
particle is one with sufficient momentum not to resonate with this electromagnetic
turbulence in the shock front and thus see the shock essentially as a discontinuity
(whereas the `thermal' particles interact strongly and are `heated'). The general
properties of shocks are discussed in the books by Zeldovich and Raizer (1966),
Whitham (1974) and Lighthill (1978); the standard reference on collisionless shocks
is the monograph by Tidman and Krall (1971).

    The notation and nomenclature used in this review is, in general, standard. The
Dirac distribution is denoted as usual by S and the Heaviside unit step function by
H . The symbol A is used both for the cross product of two vectors (denoted by
boldface type) and for the exterior (or wedge) product of differential forms. `Cosmic
ray' is often used as a convenient synonym for `energetic charged particle' and the
definition of pitch in (2.1) is non-standard. Momentum always means kinetic momen-
tum (not the canonical momentum which contains an electromagnetic part) but this
does not affect the use of Liouville's theorem.

2. Basic theory

This section begins with a simple heuristic derivation of the diffusive transport equation.
The kinematic structure (i.e. space-time geometry) of the electromagnetic and velocity
fields at a shock is then discussed and scatter-free acceleration briefly considered.
The third, and major, part discusses as simply as possible the fundamental ideas of
diffusive shock acceleration.

2.1. Transport of energetic charged particles

We begin with the elementary result that in a uniform magnetic field a freely moving
charged particle follows a helical trajectory, the superposition of a uniform translation
parallel to the field and a regular gyration perpendicular to the field. The particle's
pitch, p, is the cosine of the angle between its momentum vector p and the magnetic
field B :

                                            k=P`BIPB  (2.1)
and its parallel and perpendicular momenta are

                   PI1= PP

                   p 1 = (1 -p 2)1'2p.

The gyroradius is

                   rg =p,/ZeB                         (2.3)

where Z e is the particle's electric charge (in SI units; in Gaussian units the RHS must
be multiplied by the speed of light).

    Fortunately the real world is not as simple as first-year physics; cosmic magnetic
fields are usually neither static nor uniform, they contain irregularities and variations
which perturb the particles and lead to scattering. If we think of the simplest case, a
homogeneous background medium permeated by a uniform magnetic field on which
      An introduction to the theory of diffusive shock acceleration  977

are imposed small static irregularities, then because the electric field is identically
zero particles conserve their energy (and scalar momentum) on scattering but have
their pitch changed (and also their gyrophase, but this is usually unimportant). If the
scattering is `sufficientlystochastic' (it would be interesting to be able to give a precise

- definition of this) the distribution function F(p,x, t ) or phase space density of the

particles is kept close to isotropy, F ( p ,x, t ) f(p, x, t ) where f is the isotropic part of

F,and the particle transport can be described by the diffusion equation

      -af= V(KVf)                                                    (2.4)

      at

where K is the (anisotropic) diffusion tensor. Much effort has gone into calculating K
in terms of the irregularity spectrum (see, for example, Volk (1973) or Skilling (1975)
and references therein) but the general nature of the result is adequately shown by
the following simple argument (cf Blandford (1979) and Longair (1981)).

    The irregularities which are most effective at scattering a particle are those with

length scales comparable to its gyroradius; the mean square field variation due to
these is of the order of k I ( k ) where k - r g l and I ( k ) is the spatial power spectruln
of the irregularities. The mean square variation in the field direction on the length
scale rg is thus

      cp2- kI(k)/Bg                                                  (2.5)

where Bo is the uniform mean field. Each gyroperiod the particle's pitch angle is

changed a random amount of the order of cp and after N periods the accumulated

change is of the order of N1/2cp,This becomes of the order of unity, i.e. the particle

`forgets' its original pitch, when N - q - 2 - B z [ k I ( k ) ] - 1 so that the mean free path

along the field is All-Nr, and the scattering frequency U - V/Ali. The diffusion

coefficient parallel to the field is thus

      ~ 1 1 - ?jA ;f U -$,vB [kI( k ) ] - ' .                        (2.6)

Between scatterings a particle accumulates a displacement perpendicular to the mean
field of the order of

      AL-N1'2cprg-rg                                                 (2.7)

so that the perpendicular diffusion coefficient is

                                           12  1
      K ~ - ~ A-jr~,v/uN.

Thus

where K B =$rgv,the `Bohm' diffusion coefficient, is essentially the smallest diffusion
coefficient allowed by this model of particle transport (it corresponds to a totally
random field on the scale r g ) .

    This assumes scattering by stationary magnetic irregularities (scattering centres)
which is, of course, unrealistic. There are two types of scattering centre motion which
must be considered. First, there can be large-scale motions of the background system
which advect the centres with velocity U. Clearly this requires us to replace the time
derivative in (2.4) by a convective derivative:

      aa                                                             (2.10)

      --H-+u.v

      at at
978      L O'CDrury

and also, if the large-scale motion is convergent or divergent, we must add a term to
represent adiabatic changes in the particle momenta. The form of this term can be
deduced either by energy conservation or, more simply, by using Liouville's theorem;
a convergence in position space must be matched by an equal divergence in momentum
space. These heuristic arguments (similar to those used by Parker (1965); cf also
Dolginov and Toptyghin (1966)) lead to the transport equation

     z+U Vf =V(KVf) +$v* up - af               (2.11)
     at                                    aP

for diffusive transport in a medium where the scattering centres are fixed in the

background.
    There remains the second type of motion, that of the individual centres relative

to the background. If this has a systematic component it should obviously be added
to the background velocity U (the energetic particles cannot see the background
directly, they can only sense the mean velocity of the scattering centres). The residual
random component causes each particle to have its momentum changed by a random
amount of the order of Ap - p V / v at each scattering where V is the velocity of a
centre. This gives rise to a diffusion in momentum space with coefficient

         D - f ( A p ) ' ~- V 2 p 2 / q q      (2.12)

which represents classical second-order Fermi acceleration (Fermi 1949, 1954)so that
the complete transport equation is

                                               (2.13)

A formal derivation of essentially this equation is given in the paper by Skilling (1975).
The velocity V is the propagation speed of a small disturbance in the plasma, thus
under astrophysical conditions it will usually be of the order of the AlfvCn speed and
is often small enough to be neglected.

2.2. Shock kinematics and scatter-free acceleration

Let us leave, for the moment, the dynamical questions of scattering and transport and
turn to the kinematical questions of the magnetic-field configuration at a shock and
the particle trajectories in this field. At least locally we can treat the shock front as
plane and the upstream and downstream media as uniform with velocities U 1 ,Uz and
magnetic fields B 1 ,B2. In almost all cases the high plasma conductivity will ensure
that the electric field vanishes in the plasma rest frame (so that = -U1,2AB^,^).
Let us begin in an inertial frame moving with the upstream fluid and look at the
velocity with which the point of intersection between a magnetic-field line and the
shock front moves. There is a physically significant distinction between those shocks
in which this velocity is subluminal and those in which it is greater than or equal to
the speed of light; only in the first case can charged particles be reflected from the shock.

    In the subluminal case, by boosting parallel to the field at the velocity of the
intersection point, we find a proper Lorentz transformation which takes us to a frame

in which U 1is parallel to B 1 ,E l= 0 and the shock front is stationary. We can then

translate the origin to the shock front and rotate the coordinate system so that the

upstream region is the half-space x <0 and U1lies in the xy plane. The electromagnetic
An introduction to the theory of diffusive shock acceleration                      979

matching conditions imply that

                                                                                   (2.14)

but Ez Bz = OjEZxBz=x0 .$EZx= 0; thus EZ= 0 and Uz is also parallel to BZ.In

this way, if the shock is subluminal, we can construct an essentially unique frame in
which the shock is stationary and the electric field vanishes everywhere (figure l(a)).

Figure 1. The simplified normal   forms of the magnetic and    velocity fields at  il 'Bz
the intersection point between a  magnetic-field line and the  front moves (a)
luminally.                                                                         a steady plane shock where
                                                                                   subluminally and ( b )super-

   The kinematic structure of the shock is contained in the angles e l , e2between B 1 ,

BZand the shock normal and the compression ratio r = U l x / U z xIf. = OZ = 0 the

shock is said to be parallel, else oblique. The dynamical constraints imposed by mass
momentum and energy conservation (which give the MHD Rankine-Hugoniot condi-
tions: see de Hoffmann and Teller (1950) and Lust (1955a, b)) show that, except in

very unusual circumstances, V zand Bz lie in the xy plane and relate e2 and r to the

upstream dynamical parameters. The general formulae are quite complicated, but
the special case of a strong shock (where the kinetic energy density and kinetic pressure
dominate upstream) is simple and instructive. From mass conservation

                                  PlUlX = p z U z x = A                            (2.15)

where p is the mass density, momentum conservation gives

                                                      u1, = u 2 y                  (2.16)

                                         AUI, =AUzx+P
where P is the downstream pressure and energy conservation gives

                                                                                   (2.17)

.$r=l+- 2E
            P
980                                  L O'CDrury

where E is the downstream internal energy density. For a monatomic non-relativistic

gas P = $ E and r = 4;for a relativistic gas P =;E and r = 7. From U1, = rUZxand

U1, = U 2 ,we deduce that r tan 81 = tan 82.
    But what if the point of intersection moves superluminally at velocity v > c ? Then

a boost along the field at c 2 / v is a proper Lorentz transformation to a frame where
this velocity is infinite, i.e. where the entire field line intersects the shock front
simultaneously. In this frame the magnetic field upstream is perpendicular to the
shock normal but the shock is not stationary; however, by boosting along the shock
normal at the shock speed we can find a frame where the field B1 (and hence also
B2)is still perpendicular to the shock normal and the shock is stationary. The incoming

fluid flows in at velocity U1and at an angle el to the shock normal and exists at U2,

02:the upstream electric field, -U1 A B1, is of magnitude UIBl cos 8; matching to the

downstream field shows that E l=E 2# 0 and B2= rB1 (figure l(6)).

    Thus in both the subluminal and superluminal cases we can find certain frames in
which the electromagnetic field has an especially simple form. The luminal case does
not admit such simplification, but is exceptional and physically should probably be
regarded as a degenerate form of the superluminal case. We now examine energetic
particle trajectories in these fields, a problem considered for the case of a purely
perpendicular shock by Dorman and Freidman (1959), Shabanskii (1961) and Schatz-
man (1963) and for the general case by Hudson (1965), Alekseev and Kropotkin
(1970) and many subsequent workers.

    Let us begin by looking at a superluminal shock; then the fields reduce to an
electric field

                 E = -UlxBley = -U2*B2ey                                        (2.18)

perpendicular to the magnetic field

                                                                                (2.19)

The trajectory of an energetic particle in the upstream region consists of the usual
helical motion in the B field superimposed on an ` EA B 'drift towards the shock at
velocity U1,. As the particle (or rather its guiding centre) drifts through the shock
the smaller downstream gyroradius causes a drift parallel to E which increases its
momentum. This effect can be rather simply calculated in the limit U >> U1, by applying
Liouville's theorem. The momentum gained by a particle is then almost independent
of its gyrophase so that

2n-p,2 d p A d~p11A2dx2 A dy2 A dzz = 2 x p ~ d1pLlA dpii1 A dxl A dy1 A dzl.   (2.20)

But clearly dx2 A dy2 A dz2 = ( l / r ) dxl A dyl A d z l and pi12 =pill. Thus

                 ~ 1 ~ 2P , Z= rpll d p i i                                     (2.21)
                                                                                (2.22)
and integrating

                 p L 2 = rpll +constant.22

    The constant can be found by noting that pI1 = 0 implies (in this limit, U >> UlX)pI2=
0; it follows that

                                                                                (2.23)
         A n introduction to the theory of diffusiveshock acceleration  98 1

i.e. the particle approximately conserves its first magnetic moment as it would have
(and for exactly the same reason, namely approximate gyrophase independence) had
the change in the magnetic field been adiabatic rather than abrupt.

    We see that the perpendicular momentum of an energetic particle can be increased
by a factor of the square root of the compression ratio. With r in the range 4-7 this
is not much acceleration. Furthermore a subsequent expansion of the medium to its
original density annuls the effect.

    We now turn to the subluminal case. Here we can find a frame where the
electromagnetic field reduces to a purely magnetic field and in which, therefore,
particles must conserve their energy. Whereas in the superluminal case all particles
were forced to go through the shock, and had in consequence to increase their energy
to find enough downstream phase space, in this case, because they are not allowed
to increase their energy, there is not enough phase space for all particles to be
transmitted and some must be reflected. Considering particles of momentum p ,
upstream pitch p1 and gyrophase a l , if these are transmitted with pitch p2 and
gyrophase a 2then Liouville's theorem states that

but      p 2 d p 1 A d a 1 A dxl = p 2 dp2 A dc12 A d ~ 2               (2.24)
so that            dx1.2 = p1,zu dt COS 01,2                            (2.25)
or
         cos 01p1 d p l A d a l =COS 02p2 dp2 A da2

                                                                        (2.26)

and there is a similar formula for reflected particles. The assumption of approximate
gyrophase invariance again implies approximate conservation of the magnetic moment,
as verified by numerical simulations (e.g. Terasawa 1979).

    If all particles incident on the shock from upstream were transmitted, then

so that particles must be reflected if the downstream field is stronger than the upstream.
There is, however, no need for particles incident from downstream to be reflected
and indeed they are not as shown by Hudson (1965). An interesting and important
implication of these formulae is that, if the upstream and downstream distributions
are isotropic and have the same density, the combined distribution of particles
transmitted through and reflected from the shock is also isotropic and has the same
uniform density. This clearly follows on thermodynamic grounds; if the distribution
were anisotropic this would imply a violation of the second law.

    As far as acceleration is concerned the subluminal case looks even worse than the
superluminal because we have perfect conservation of particle energy. However, this
is to some extent an artefact of the frame we are using; with respect to other reference
systems, in particular that in which the incoming fluid flows parallel to the shock
normal, the reflected particles are accelerated. The effect can be quite substantial if
982  L O'CDrury

the transformation to the E = 0 frame involves `large'velocities, i.e. for quasi-perpen-
dicular shocks, but is not enormous; the maximum kinetic energy gain of a non-
relativistic particle is

     AT - 4 T ( r - 1)                                     (2.28)

and for a relativistic particle the momentum gain is only

     Ap-2p(r-l)                                            (2.29)

(Toptyghin 1980). Of course, these energy changes can be interpreted in terms of
particle drifts at the shock parallel to the U A Belectric field (cf Webb et a1 1983).

2.3. Diffusive acceleration at shocks

We have seen in the last subsection that particles can gain energy by interacting once
with a shock front. However, this effect, even in the most favourable cases, can only
increase the energy of a particle by a moderate amount; furthermore, as the process
is purely kinematic and reversible the spectrum of the accelerated particles is essentially
the pre-acceleration spectrum shifted in energy. This situation is completely changed
when diffusive effects are included. The number of times a particle interacts with the
shock then becomes a random variable and some particles, by interacting many times
with the shock, achieve very high energies. This stochastic aspect also means that the
process destroys information (equivalently entropy is generated, not only in the
background plasma, but also in the energetic particle distribution) so that the spectrum
of the accelerated particles can be relatively independent of the details of the pre-
acceleration spectrum. Studies of the simplest version of this effect, the steady diffusive
acceleration of test particles at a one-dimensional parallel shock, have followed two
approaches: a microscopic approach in which the energy changes and histories of
individual particles are studied and a macroscopic approach which uses the formalism
of the distribution function and its associated transport equation.

2.3.1. The macroscopic approach. In this version (historically the first (Krymsky 1977,
Axford et a1 1977, Blandford and Ostriker 1978)) it is assumed that the velocity of
the particles is very much greater than that of the fluid and that scattering of the
particles keeps the distribution function almost isotropic in the fluid frame (so that
the diffusion approximation is valid), that this scattering is elastic, and that the scatterers
behave as if they had an infinite effective mass (the particle energy in the local fluid
frame does not change on scattering). The shock front is taken to be an infinite plane
separating uniform upstream and downstream media and perpendicular to the uniform
magnetic field (i.e. the field lines are parallel to the shock normal). From the standard
theory of shock waves we know that there exists an inertial frame in which the shock
front is stationary and occupies the y , z plane and in which the fluid flows parallel to
the x axis. In this frame all quantities depend spatially only on x (it is in this sense
that the problem is one-dimensional) and the flow velocity is steady and given by

                                                                                                  (2.30)

where U1and U,are the, constant, upstream and downstream velocities. The transport

equation for the isotropic part of the energetic particle phase space density as seen
A n introduction to the theory of diffusive shock acceleration  983

in the local fluid frame, f (t,x , p ) , is then

                                                                (2.31)

where K ( x , p ) is the spatial diffusion coefficient for particles of momentum p along
the field lines.

    Having chosen a frame such that the background plasma flow is steady it is natural
to look for steady solutions of (2.31). Upstream and downstream this reduces to

                                                                (2.32)

where U equals U 1or U2and is constant. The general solution is easily found to be

                                                                (2.33)

where g l and g 2 are arbitrary functions of p . If we now impose the natural boundary
conditions that f tend to some given distribution f l far upstream, i.e. f ( x , p ) + f l ( p )
as x + -CO, and remain finite downstream, i.e. If(x,p)I <CO as x +CO, then

                                                                (2.34)

as long as j,"dX`/K ( x ' ,p ) + *CO when x -j fa.(If this condition is not satisfied stricter

boundary conditions are required.) The physical content here is simply that in the
diffusion-advection equation (2.32) a steady state can be achieved by balancing the
diffusive flux against the advected flux only in the upstream half-space.

    To relate the two unknown functions f z and g l to f l we need two matching
conditions at the shock. The key here is that a parallel shock does nothing locally to
energetic particles; there is no discontinuity in the magnetic field and the particles
simply continue their helical paths across the front. Thus the complete momentum
space distribution function, as measured in the shock frame, must be continuous across
the front.

    In the diffusion approximation the angular dependence in the fluid frame of the
complete distribution function, F ( x , p , k ) ,can be obtained by expanding F in a series
of Legendre polynomials, truncating after two terms and setting the anisotropic part
proportional to the gradient of the isotropic part; thus

                           a                                    (2.35)

F ( x , p , k )- f ( x ,P ) -PA G f( x ,P )

where A is the `scattering mean free path' related to K by K =hu/3 where v is the
particle velocity. Inserting expression (2.34) for the isotropic part and evaluating just
upstream and just downstream from the shock gives

                                                                                                  (2.36)

                             [f2 x =o+.

In this expression p (but not x ) is measured in the local fluid frame; on transforming
to the shock frame, which moves at velocity -U relative to the fluid, to order U / v
984      L O'C Drury

the particle momenta transform as           (1- P )!        (2.37)

                                   P -P)=P

and in consequence, phase space densities being invariant,

Equating the isotropic and anisotropic parts of the upstream and downstream distribu-
tions then gives the two required matching conditions, namely

         fl+gl =f2                                          (2.39)

and

     a                                                a
     U $ -(f l + gI) +3U1g1 = UZP -fz.                      (2.40)
     aP                                               aP

These are usually interpreted as expressing continuity of the particle number density
and particle streaming at all momenta.

    It is interesting to note that these matching conditions are in a sense already
contained within the transport equation (2.31) itself; if we require this to hold, not
only upstream and downstream from the shock, but also at the front itself, then we
recover exactly the above conditions. Of course, as U is discontinuous at the shock,

and perhaps K also, we cannot require f to satisfy (2.31) there in the usual sense; we

can, however, require that it be what is technically called a weak solution. Roughly
speaking, this means that if we multiply both sides of the equation by a smooth test
function, integrate across the shock from -E to E and interpret all ambiguous terms
by formally applying integration by parts, then on taking the limit E + 0 the result

should be an identity for all test functions. Thus multiplying by 5," dX'/K and noting

that the worst singularity allowed by the representation (2.34) is a simple discontinuity

in f at x = 0, after some manipulation and estimation we derive

         [fl"'E= O(E)                                       (2.41)

from which it follows that f is in fact continuous at x = 0. If we now use 1 as a test

function we get

                                                            (2.42)

which gives the second matching condition and fixes the discontinuity in the derivative
o f f . One can then show that if these conditions are satisfied the integral with any
other test function is also O ( E ) .That we are able to derive the boundary conditions
from the transport equation in this way is simply another expression of the fact that
at the microscopic level a parallel shock does nothing to energetic particles and should
not be given any deeper significance.

    Eliminating gl between (2.39) and (2.40) and introducing r = U 1 / U 2 ,the shock
compression ratio, we obtain

                                                                                                  (2.43)
A n introduction to the theory of diffusive shock acceleration  985

as the required equation relating the distribution function f l far upstream to that
downstream, f2. Setting a = 3r(r - l)-' the solution is easily found by elementary

means to be

                                                                (2.44)

where b is an arbitrary constant of integration. The first term can be interpreted as
the spectrum of particles advected into the shock from upstream and there accelerated;
the second as representing particles injected from the thermal background plasma
into the same acceleration process. Ignoring for the moment the second term, the
first term can be written

                                                                                                  (2.45)

so that for those particles which are advected through the shock the downstream
spectrum is obtained from the upstream spectrum by convolving with a truncated
power law.

    The significance of this is that if the upstream spectrum is softer than a power law
spectrum with slope a, then the downstream spectrum has as asymptote at high
momenta a power law spectrum of slope a regardless of the detailed form of the
incoming spectrum. Furthermore, shocks in fluids with a ratio of specific heats y have
a compression ratio

r= Y + l                                                        (2.46)
    y -1

where M is the shock Mach number so that for the standard case of a strong shock
in a non-relativistic plasma, y = 5/3, M + CO, we have r +4- and a +4+. This is
encouragingly close to the index of 4.3 inferred for the source of the galactic cosmic
rays.

2.3.2. Microscopic derivation. The above macroscopic analysis is straightforward;
however it appears to lack physical content (essentially because this has all gone into
deriving the transport equation); at the end of a formal analysis we find a downstream
spectrum which contains accelerated particles, but how were they accelerated and
why should they have a power law spectrum? The advantage of the alternative
microscopic derivation (Bell 1978a, see also Peacock 1981, Michel 1981) is that it
reveals the basic physical processes responsible for the acceleration.

    Let us consider an energetic particle which crosses the shock front from upstream
to downstream and ask the question: what is its probability of never returning to the
shock, that is of escaping downstream to CO? Denote the number density of particles
having velocity U relative to the local fluid frame by n ; then from the diffusion model
we know that n is constant downstream. The flux of such particles escaping to CO is
nU2 whereas the flux entering the downstream region by crossing the front from

                                                      1

upstream to downstream is lopun dp/2 = nv/4 (assuming an almost isotropic distribu-

tion; of the n particles one-half are moving to the right with an average projected
velocity of one-half U). Thus the probability of not returning must be nU2(nv/4)-' =
4U2/v which by assumption is small, i.e. almost all particles cross the shock many times.
986      L O'CDrury

    We now ask: what is the average change in a particle's momentum with respect
to the local fluid frame when it crosses the shock? If the particle has momentum p ,
velocity U and pitch p in the upstream fluid frame, then in the shock frame its
momentum is p(1 + p U 1 / u ) . This is unchanged on crossing the shock, and thus relative
to the downstream frame its momentum is p[1 + p ( U 1- U2)/z1]. Note that as we are
only working to order U / Vwe can ignore the small changes in pitch angle as we go
from frame to frame and also the anisotropy of the distribution when averaging. Thus
the average change in momentum is

(assuming isotropy, the probability of crossing the shock at an angle 8 is proportional
to cos 8, hence the weighting factor of 2 p ) . On re-crossing the shock in the other
direction U1 and U2 are interchanged, but p runs from 0 to -1 so that the answer
is the same.

    We can now calculate the downstream spectrum. It is rather easier to work here
with the integral spectrum N ( x ,p ) , the number density of particles with momentum
greater than p ,

                                                                                                  (2.48)

For simplicity (and with no real loss of generality) let us consider the case where all
the particles are advected in from upstream with the same momentum p o . Then
upstream,

                                                                                                  (2.49)

and because particles are conserved and never lose energy, downstream

Let p n and v,, denote the momentum and associated velocity of a particle which returns
from the downstream region n times and so makes a total of 2n crossings of the
shock. In reality p n is a random variable with a complicated distribution, but for large
n and v >>Uthe distribution is sharply peaked and to first order in U / V we may
regard it as determinate and given by

so that

                     (2.52)

The probability of the particle reaching this momentum, i.e. of returning n times from
downstream, is

                     (2.53)
         An introduction to the theory of diffusive shock acceleration  987

so that

                                                                                                    (2.54)

or
                                                                                                    (2.55)

The number density of particles accelerated to momentum p,, or more is the total
number density of particles, N 2 ( p o )m, ultiplied by the probability of crossing the shock
sufficiently often, P,; thus

                                                                                                    (2.56)

and

in agreement with the macroscopic derivation.
    This derivation shows very clearly that, as in all Fermi acceleration processes, the

key to obtaining a power law is that the momentum gained by a particle in each
elementary acceleration event should be proportional to the momentum it already
has and to its probability of escaping from the acceleration region. However, unlike
other Fermi processes, the constant of proportionality, which determines the slope of
the power law, is not arbitrary but is fixed by the kinematics of the shock.

3. Linear modifications

The elementary and idealised theory of the last section can be generalised and made
more realistic in several ways. It is convenient to divide these extensions into two
classes according to whether the reaction of the particles on the acceleration process
is considered; this section deals with those in which the particles are treated as test
particles and their reaction ignored. This assumption, that they move without influence
on one another or on the background plasma, means that the problem of their transport
in a given plasma system is linear and as usual this greatly simplifies the mathematical
analysis. In the last section the shock was parallel, steady and plane and the particles
moved very much faster than the background plasma, were scattered elastically, were
not subject to additional energy loss processes and did not react on the plasma system;
the modifications produced by relaxing all but the last of these conditions will now
be examined.

3.1. Oblique shocks

The restriction to parallel shocks seems to be a major defect of the elementary theory
(the average shock obliquity is some 60" if the magnetic-field direction is uncorrelated
with the direction of shock propagation). Of course, it is clear that the acceleration
988  L O'CDrury

mechanism continues to operate as long as particles can cross the front in both
directions and be diffusively scattered on either side, but one might expect that the
possibility of direct particle reflection from the shock would lead to significant alter-
ations. Rather remarkably, at least to O ( U / v ) t,his is not the case.

    Consider an oblique shock where the point of intersection between a magnetic-field
line and the front moves subluminally; then there exists a unique frame where the

electric field vanishes, the fluid flows in upstream parallel to the magnetic field B 1at

velocity U 1and angle to the shock normal and exists downstream parallel to B2
at velocity U , and angle O2 (figure l ( a ) ) . In the macroscopic approach the transport
equation (2.11)for this problem reduces to

where i = 1 if x <0, 2 if x > 0 and K ~ I K, ~ are the diffusion coefficients parallel and

perpendicular to the field (normally K I >~ > K ~ ) .The upstream and downstream solutions
are clearly exactly the same as in the parallel case if normal components are used,

i.e. if U is interpreted as U cos 8 and K as K I c~os28 + K~ sin28. The problem of finding

the correct matching conditions between these two solutions is not quite as easy as it
is for the parallel shock because particles interact with an oblique shock in a non-trivial
way. One can however argue that as long as the particles perceive the shock front
merely as a kink in the magnetic field (unlike the low-energy particles constituting
the background plasma which must be heated by collective effects in the front) the
matching conditions must take the form of a linear relationship between the density

f and the streaming S (in the shock frame) upstream and downstream:

where s = -$Up(af/ap)-K af/ax.

    Liouville's theorem implies that a possible solution must be f +=f-, S , = S - = 0,
from which it follows that a = 1,c = 0. Requiring particle number conservation then
shows that d = 1. The remaining parameter, b, has the dimensions of an inverse
velocity and is clearly of order l / u . Thus when, as in all the cases here considered,
S/f = O ( U )this term is essentially of order U / v and can be neglected. One must
however be slightly cautious; the distributions at the shock front cannot have the
simple anisotropies presupposed in the diffusion approach so that, although the above
argument shows that within the diffusion approach the only possible matching condi-
tions are continuity off and of the streaming, it is not obvious that this approximation
can correctly describe acceleration at an oblique shock. Ignoring this worry, we see
that within a macoscopic diffusion theory the upstream solutions, the downstream
solutions and the matching conditions at the front for an oblique shock are all exactly
the same as those for a parallel shock once normal components are used. Thus the
spectrum is still determined by the same single parameter, the shock compression,
and is essentially independent of the obliquity.

    It is sometimes argued that if a fraction E of particles incident on the front are
reflected then the first matching condition should be

     f(0+)=(1-c)f(O-)  (3.3)

(see Fisk 1971, Achterberg and Norman 1980) but this is clearly incorrect if the
An introduction to the theory of diffusive shock acceleration  989

reflection is of the magnetostatic type considered here. The second boundary condition
can probably be justified by measuring the streaming, not directly at the front, but a
few mean free paths away (cf Toptyghin 1980); however, the argument is rather
delicate and the more convincing proof of its correctness is that the same results follow
if we repeat, as always working only to first order in Ulv, the essential steps of the
microscopic derivation.

    Suppose a particle reaches the shock from upstream on a trajectory with pitch p1
and gyrophase a l . It then interacts with the shock and is either transmitted with pitch
and phase p 2 , a z or is reflected back with p 3 , a 3 . If transmitted it diffuses in the
downstream region until either escaping to 00 or returning to the shock with p4, a4
whereupon it is then transmitted back with p5, a5 into the upstream region (figure 2).
Denote by T1 the set of p , CY values corresponding to upstream trajectories which

lead to particle transmission through the shock, by R 1those leading to reflection, by
T2 those downstream leading to transmission back upstream and let a superior bar

denote the set of reversed trajectories; thus, for example,

T2 = { ( p ,4 - p , CY)ETz).                                   (3.4)

Figure 2. Schematic representation of the five sets of pitches and gyrophases used in the discussion.

    Then clearly a particle which starts on a trajectory in T1after interacting with the

shock proceeds downstream on a trajectory in Tz and one in R 1gets reflected onto

a trajectory in R1.Together T1and R 1constitute the right hemisphere and Tz is the

left hemisphere (no reflection from downstream)

Ti u R =~{ ( p ,C Y ) ~<O p s 1, O G C Y < 2 ~ }               (3.5)
      T z = { ( p ,C X ) -~ 1S p < O , O < CY < 2 ~ } .

    Assuming that particles incident from upstream on the shock come from an almost
isotropic and uniform distribution the probability of transmission is the ratio of the
flux in T1to the total incident flux:
990                         L O'CDrury
By Liouville's theorem

Thus, transforming to the downstream variables,

and the flux into the downstream region is

                        nu                          n
                        -cos elp1 d p l A d a 1= --U cos 82
                                                    4                                      (3.9)

whereas the flux to CO is nU2cos oz. Thus exactly as in the case of the parallel shock

the probability of escape after transmission is 4U2/v. The combined probability that
a particle incident from upstream will cross the shock and escape is therefore
4u2 COS 62/21 COS 81.

    A particle which does not escape gains energy either by direct reflection, or by
two transmissions across the shock. If its momentum with respect to the upstream
fluid frame is p , then the expected momentum gain is

                                                 r

      +PTJ (p4Uz-psUdp4dp4~da4                                                             (3.10)

                   T2

(the probability of escaping is O ( U / u )and can be ignored in this calculation). But
by repeated application of Liouville's theorem

      I,, [R,-p3p1dp1Adcf1=         - p 32 d p 3 A d a 3 = p 2 d p Ada                     (3.11)

                                                                                        I

and

                                                                                           (3.12)

and

Thus

                                                                                           (3.14)

    Finally by exactly the same argument as in the case of the parallel shock the slope
of the integral spectrum is given by the ratio of the escape probability to the mean
momentum gain:

      d--In N - -4U2 cos 0 2 / u cos O1 -- -3 U2 COS 8 2                                   (3.15)
      d lnp                 (AP)/P          U1 cos e1- U2 cos e 2
               A n introduction to the theory of diffusive shock acceleration  99 1

which, when expressed in terms of the shock compression ratio, r =
U1cos Ol/U2cos 02, is independent of the obliquity. Thus if U is the conventional
shock velocity (normal to the front, i.e. U = U1cos 81) the steady spectrum does not
depend on the obliquity 8 if sec 8 << v / U (this constraint can be very severe for almost
perpendicular shocks).

3.2. Time-dependent solutions

A dimensional argument suggests that the basic time scale associated with diffusive
shock acceleration should be of order K/U' and this is confirmed by more detailed
calculations (Forman and Morfill 1979, Krymsky et a1 1979, Vasil'yev et a1 1980,
Axford 1981a, b). Following Axford (1981a, b) we study the model system of a steady
planar shock in which a steady monoenergetic source of particles located in the shock
is switched on at t = 0. Thus we look for time-dependent solutions of (2.31) with
velocity profile (2.30), f(t, x , p ) = 0 at t = 0 and a source Q 6 ( p - p o ) at x = 0.

    On taking the Laplace transform with respect to time:

(2.31) becomes upstream ( i = 1) and downstream (i = 2)

                                                                               (3.17)

(for simplicity we assume K to be independent of x ) of which the solutions satisfying

the boundary conditions g + 0 as x += *OaO re g CC exp (pix)where

                                                         1/2
                   1. [U.
               pi  = 11- (-1)i  (1+$) i                                        (3.18)
                     2Ki

Let go(s, p ) = g ( s , 0 ,p ) be the transform of the spectrum at the shock; then the matching
conditions

                                                                               (3.19)

imply that

                                                                               (3.20)

On letting Ai = (1+~ K ~ s)l//'U-?1 this can be written

with solution
992                        L O'CDrury

    The time-dependent spectrum of accelerated particles at the shock can now
formally be obtained by inverting the transform:

(the path of integration lies to the right of all the singularities of the integrand). As
usual, the asymptotic behaviour at large times is obtained by looking only at the
contribution from the rightmost singularity of the integrand, here the simple pole at
s = 0, which gives the steady spectrum

                                                                                  (3.24)

At the injection momentum p o this steady value is established immediately, i.e.

                        fo(t, P o ) =fo(m, Po) = __3Q__ t > O .                   (3.25)
                                                U1- U ,

At a general time t > O and momentum p > p o (3.22) shows that the spectrum has the
form

where                          [1 +ioD                                            (3.26)
and                                                                               (3.27)
                           cp ( t )=- exp [ts - h (s)] ds

                                     27rl -im

                                                                                  (3.28)

Physically we can interpret cp (t,p o , pl) either as the probability distribution function

for the time taken to accelerate a particle from momentum p o to p1 or, by fixing t

and regarding cp as a function of pl, as the particle momentum spectrum (normalised

to the steady spectrum) resulting from the acceleration over a time interval t of a

single burst of particles injected at momentum po.

If we think of cp(t)as the acceleration time distribution for given p o , p1, then from

the obvious relations:

                           Iom cp ( t )exp (-ts) dt = exp [-h (s)]                (3.29)

and h (0)= 0, we see that

                           lop(t)dm t = 1                                         (3.30)

so that the distribution is correctly normalised. On differentiating with respect to s
       An introduction to the theory of diffusive shock acceleration              993

I and then setting s = 0 we obtain an expression for the mean acceleration time:
                          m a
                      ( t )= tcp(t)d t = -h(O)
                          0     as

                                                                                  (3.31)

Repeating this procedure we find the variance of the acceleration time:

       2 2 a2                6                  -+ K:3 )dP-
       (t )-(t) =-7h(O)=-                                                         (3.32)
                      as                        U2 P
                             u1-u2 po

and in general the n th derivative of h at s = 0 gives the n th cumulant of the probability
distribution cp(t).

    It is interesting to note that if K has a power law dependence on momentum,
K =pa, then for pl >>pothe relative width of the distribution:

                                                                                  (3.33)

Thus, unless K is almost independent of momentum ( a - 0) the peak in the acceleration

time distribution is not very sharp.

    For large values of s

                      h ( s ) = P J s -- z =3 U 1 + ~ 2 1 n P l + O ( s - " 2 )   (3.34)

where

                                                                                  (3.35)

and thus for small t

The asymptotic behaviour of cp for large t is determined by the singularity of h ( s )
with the most positive real part. Let

                                                                                  (3.37)

then the relevant singularity is at so and is a branch point of order Y = $ or !. It follows

that for large times

                      v(t)--- t-'-" exp [sot - h (sO)][l + ~ ( t - " * ) ] .      (3.38)

                              U-v)

    These asymptotic forms for the wings of the distribution and the first few moments
provide sufficient information for most purposes. An explicit expression for cp can be
found in the special case K independent of p and A 1= A 2(see Toptyghin (1980) and
Axford (1981b) for details); the case K ocp" can also be solved in terms of parabolic
cylinder functions (M Forman, personal communication).
994                                L O'CDrury

    The most important conclusion to be drawn from expression (3.31) for the mean
acceleration time is that the time scale for acceleration of particles of momentum p
in an unmodified shock is

               3 t,,,(p) =-
                                             -+- I                        (3.39)
                                   u1-u2 ( KU11

    An interesting alternative derivation of this result is possible from the microscopic
viewpoint (cf Lagage and Cesarsky 1981). Recall that the particle flux across the
shock into the upstream region is nv/4. But the total number of particles in the up-
stream region (in a steady state) is j!mn exp ( U 1 x / K 1d)x = Kln/U1. Therefore the
mean residence time of each particle must be ( K l n / U 1 )(nv/4)-' = 4 ~ 1 / U l v .This
simple argument applied to the downstream region gives an infinite mean residence
time, which is of course correct as there is a finite probability of escape. What we
really require is the mean residence time of those particles which do not escape and
to find this we need to know the probability of returning to the shock as a function
of distance downstream.

    Consider the steady solution of the diffusion equations corresponding to a source
located a distance x o downstream and with an absorbing boundary at the origin:

                  an a2n                                                  (3.40)

               U -= K 7+ Q S ( X -X O )

                 ax ax
                n(0)=0 n(co)<W.

It is clearly

               Q
               -[exp ( U X / K-)11 exp ( - U X ~ / K ) 0 s x s xo

                                                                          (3.41)

                                  (-UX~/K)I                      xo<x<co
               U

so that the flux to the origin is

                                     an                                   (3.42)
                                   K -= Q exp ( - U X ~ / K ) .

                                     ax

    Thus for a particle inserted into the flow a distance x o downstream the probability
of diffusing back to the origin must be P,,, = exp ( - U X ~ / KIt) f.ollows that the number
of particles downstream which will return to the shock is

                                                                          (3.43)

and thus the mean residence time downstream of these particles is ~ K ~ / U ,WVe.see
that the mean time taken for a particle to complete one cycle of entering the
downstream region, returning upstream and then re-entering the downstream region
is

                                                                                                (3.44)
                A n introduction to the theory of diffusive shock acceleration    995
With a mean momentum gain per cycle of                                          (3.45)
                                                                                (3.46)
this implies an acceleration time scale:

3.3. Non-planar shocks

In the simple theory the shock front was taken to be planar; it is reasonably clear
that the condition for this assumption to be valid is that the diffusion length scale,
K / U ,be small compared to the radius of curvature of the front, R. In practice this
tends to be the case if the shock is propagating and the time scales allow significant
diffusive acceleration; the shock time scale is typically R / U and R / U >> K / Uim~ plies
R >> K / U .However, in view of the importance of spherical shocks, it is interesting to
look at them in more detail. Two main cases have been considered: the blast wave
from a point explosion and the shock terminating a stellar wind.

3.3.1. The spherical explosion. This is the more interesting case because of its possible
application to the acceleration of cosmic rays in supernova blast waves. It has been
studied by Krymsky and Petukhov (1980) and Prishchep and Ptsukin (1981), both of
whom approximate the flow behind the blast wave by a linear velocity field. By further
assuming the diffusion coefficient to be independent of momentum and position they
obtain integral representations for the solution of the transport equation (in terms of
confluent hypergeometric functions) which they then approximate for small values of
the diffusion coefficient. It seems more direct to use the presence of a small parameter
from the start of the analysis and this has the further advantage of allowing more
general solutions to be studied.

    The transport equation (2.11) in spherical coordinates is

                                                                                (3.47)

where K is the radial component of the diffusion tensor, U is the radial velocity, d is
the dimensionality ( d = 3 is the only physically significant case, but it is as easy to do
the calculations for general d and it is interesting to see how the solutions depend on
the number of spatial dimensions) and spherical symmetry is assumed. We consider
a self-similar velocity field of the form

                                                                                (3.48)

where [= r/R( t )is a dimensionless co-moving radial coordinate and R ( t )is the radius

of the shock front at time t ; (3.47) then becomes

E %+ ( V - 1)[-af =-a ( E -J)f + (d - 1)
      at at at
R at

where the dimensionless small parameter E = K/RR'.The matching conditions at

[ = 1 are [f ] = 0 and [ E af/a[] = i V ( l ) p af/ap.
996  L O'CDrury

    Let us suppose all particles enter the acceleration process below some momentum
po; because the acceleration time scale is short we expect a power law spectrum to
be established from po up to some (time- and space-dependent) cut-off momentum.
The amplitude of this spectrum is determined by the balance between advection out
of the shock and advection and injection into the shock. If the seed particles are
mainly advected in from a uniform external distribution we expect an almost constant
spectrum, but if they are directly injected a dependence on the shock radius is quite
possible. With these motivations (and because it works) we look for solutions with a
time and momentum dependence of the form f ocp-"R ( t ) b . Clearly in the limit E + 0
a should approach the spectral slope found for the planar shock; the aim here is to
find out how rapid this approach is, i.e. to calculate the first-order corrections to a.

    With the above ansatz (3.49)becomes

     f + ( v - l ) ~ -a=f- Ea- + (adf - 1 ) - - - . E af    (3.50)
     a5 a t a5                                5 at

This is a standard type of singular perturbation problem; direct expansion of f in

powers of e leads to 'outer' solutions which, in general, do not satisfy the full set of
matching and boundary conditions and have to be matched to 'inner' boundary layer
type expansions. The outer upstream solution is simply f = 0 (we are only looking at
a momentum range where there are no upstream particles). The outer downstream
solution is found by substituting f = 2zofie' in (3.50)and solving the resulting recur-
rence relations. The first equation

     (1-u ) t -a=f0 [b+ $ a ( d V+gav/ag)-y"                (3.51)

             at

simply represents particle advection without diffusion. It thus has a trivial solution in

Lagrangian coordinates which, expressed in terms of 5, takes the more complicated

form

     f0=A5-ad'3exp ((b+ad/3)1' dg' ) (1- V(5))-"'           (3.52)

                                      1 5'11- V(5" 1- V(1)

The higher terms, which we do not actually need, can in principle be found in terms

of quadratures and represent small corrections for the limited diffusion which does
take place. Clearly, a direct matching of the upstream and downstream outer solutions
is only possible for the trivial solution, f = 0 everywhere, so that an inner solution is
needed.

    To obtain this expansion, valid in the neighbourhood of the shock front, we

introduce a new local variable 4' by setting 5 = 1+ E L . Then upstream, where V = 0,

(3.50)becomes

     (d - 1)-- "f>.                                         (3.53)

            1 + E [a5

Substituting the expansion f = Z z oeYi and imposing the boundary condition f +0 as

5 + CO (to match the outer upstream solution) and f = A at 5 = 0 (to match the outer

downstream solution) we easily find the first two terms to be

     fo = A exp (-0                                         (3.54)
     f l = -A exp (-1)[312+ (d +b 111.
    An introduction to the theory of diffusive shock acceleration       997

Thus to first order the inner upstream solution is

    f = A exp(-[){l-~[&?+(d+b)[]+O(~~)} [ a O .                         (3.55)

    This problem does not need an inner downstream expansion behind the shock (for
the same reason that the downstream solution in the planar solution is constant), but
for matching purposes it is convenient to re-express the outer solution in terms of the

inner variable [. This gives

        f = A [l + ~ [ ( b:+ V(l)+:V'(l)) [l- v ( l ) ] + O ( ~ ~ ) ] . (3.56)

We now determine the spectral index, a, by joining the upstream and downstream

solutions. The condition [f]= 0 has been automatically satisfied by choosing the same

constant, A , in each region; the second condition, [af/a[] = -aV(l)f/3, gives

                                                                     U
    l+E+(d+b)+c-  V(l)+: V`(1)) [ l - V ( l ) ] - ' = - V ( l )         (3.57)
                  3                                                  3

or

    U = 3u+ [ l + ( d + b ) ( - +K-+) + - - -K--] + O (v~'~()1) K -     (3.58)

    U+- U-        RU+ RU- V(1)RU-

where + and - denote values just in front of and just behind the shock, U + = &

and U- =d [1- V(l)].

    We see that in the limit E + 0 the spectral slope is that of the planar shock, as

expected. The first-order correction consists of two parts. The first, as can be seen

from its proportionality to d + b and the acceleration time scale tact, results from the

finite rate at which particles gain energy; the accelerated particles were injected in

the past when the shock was smaller and the injection rate different. The second,

proportional to V'(l)/ V(1), results from adiabatic losses in the expanding flow behind

the shock, but, at first sight rather surprisingly, only expansion above that due to the

uniform linear enlargement of the shocked volume is significant (recall that U = VSR).
Prishchep and Ptuskin (1981) consider the case b = 0 , d = 3 , V([)=constant and
obtain a first-order correction which agrees with the above.

    It is worth noting that the Sedov solution for a strong point explosion in a gas

with y = 5/3 (Kahn 1975)gives V(i3-3(tE+ 1)(3[8+5)-1so that V'(1) = V(1) = 3/4;

thus for this important case                                            (3.59)

        `-3 [ a =4 1+ (3+b) (K++5)+ +0( E 2)
                                             RU+ RU- RU-

and, with a = 4, the approximate downstream solution (3.52) is

This shows that because of the downstream adiabatic deceleration the energetic
particles are concentrated in a relatively thin shell behind the shock.

3.3.2. Stellar-wind terminal shocks. The other astrophysically significant case where
acceleration at a spherical shock may be important is that of a stellar-wind terminal
shock (Jokipii 1968, Fisk 1969, CassC and Paul 1980, Webb et a1 1982). A rough
998                        L O'C Drury

description of the dynamics of a stellar wind, sufficiently good for our purposes, is to
say that after acceleration near the star the wind expands radially at constant velocity
until its ram pressure drops to that of the external medium. A strong shock then
separates the wind from the external flow which proceeds essentially at constant
pressure (the flow downstream from a shock is subsonic) so that the velocity, if cooling
is unimportant, goes approximately as the inverse square of the radius. Thus the
radial velocity is

                           U1             r<R                      (3.61)

                           = U Z ( R / ~ ) r~>R

when R is the radius of the shock.
    The transport equation downstream, i.e. outside the shock, is

                                                                   (3.62)

with the general solution

                                                                   (3.63)

On setting

                           IR RG ( Q,=exp
                               00         dr) - 1

                                     Kr

this gives

                           f(R)=A
                           f (a)= A+@B

                           3(R,) = -UB2.                           (3.64)

                           dr  K

It should be noted that @, although it can be very large, is not infinite. Thus the
spectrum at infinity must be specified as one of the boundary conditions and it is not
enough merely to require that the solution be bounded downstream.

   Inside the shock, r <R , there is strong adiabatic deceleration in the expanding

wind and the transport equation is

                                                                   (3.65)

The matching conditions at the shock are the usual ones, continuity o f f and of the
streaming. The inner boundary condition depends on the behaviour of K . If K + 0 as
r + 0, then any particles near the origin suffer catastrophic adiabatic cooling and f + 0
as r + 0. However, if K does not go to zero, or if the boundary condition is applied
at a finite radius, it will be necessary to supply more information.

    This problem is non-trivial. However, by assuming K to be proportional to r and
independent of momentum Webb et a1 (1982) were able to find a complete analytic
solution. Although the answer is given in closed form and in terms of elementary
functions it is extremely complicated and will not be reproduced here. Instead, as in
       An introduction to the theory of difusive shock acceleration        999

the blast wave case, I will consider the `small K ' limit as a perturbation to the plane
shock theory.

    Assume E = K ~ ( R ) / Uis~a Rsmall parameter and introduce the inner variable

                                                                           (3.66)

Then to first order in E the transport equation (3.65) becomes

                                                                           (3.67)

where

       -a -In K --(y                  a In r - 8--In K P .                 (3.68)

       a Inp

The zeroth-order solution, as always, is fo = A ( p )exp (5) and the first-order solution

is easily found to be

       f = A e x p ( f ) ( l - ~ [ ( f - ~ ) f ' +2a( 2 2+p~a+A~) ~f1a1.p  (3.69)

The inward streaming at the shock is

                                                                           (3.70)

and matching this to the streaming outside gives

where Q is a source term representing injection at the shock and the 1J2B term is a
source due to inward diffusion from infinity. Combining the two sources, for injection
at a single momentum p o we find an approximate power law spectrum above p o with
slope

       -a l-n f =- 3u1 [1 + 2 E (A-:) (3.72] ) .
       alnp U1-U2                     u,-u2 3

    In this problem there also exists a tail of decelerated particles below p o , To see

this we have to introduce an `inner' momentum variable as well. Let p = p o ( l+&II),

then to zeroth order the transport equation reduces to

       -a=f - a'f +-af                                                     (3.73)

       a i a i 2 an

which is to be solved subject to the boundary conditions f = exp ( f )for f <0, II = 0,
continuity of the streaming across f = 0 and f + 0 as II+ -m.
1000                         L O'CDrury

The solution is              -1-erfI)*(l - n  5 <0,II<O  (3.74)

     f = i [exp (lje)rf`c (

which shows the typical effects of modulation by the stellar wind.
    These results agree with the exact solution found by Webb et a1 (1982) and, as

can be seen from figure 3, reproduce its qualitative features well; above the injection
energy the spectrum is a slightly steeper power law than the plane shock theory would
predict and inside the shock there is a `modulated'tail below the injection energy.

Figure 3. The spectrum of particles (at radius r ) accelerated by a spherically symmetric stellar-wind terminal
shock (radiusR). The source of particles is a monoenergetic density n l at infinity, the shock has a
compression ratio of four and the diffusion coefficient is assumed to equal Ur everywhere (from Webb et
a1 1982).

    An interesting feature of this case is that the only reasonable source of `seed'
particles for acceleration is direct injection at the shock from the thermal background

(cf 9 4.4).Energetic particles released at the star, e.g. by flares, suffer strong adiabatic

losses as they are advected to the shock and external cosmic rays have to diffuse
inwards against the downstream flow which reduces their intensity by a factor @ =

o (expe-').

3.4. Additional energy gains and losses

One can easily add terms to the basic transport equation (2.11) to represent other
physical processes capable of changing a particle's momentum; obvious examples are
synchrotron losses at high energy, ionisation losses at low energy, collisional losses
An introduction to the theory of diffusive shock acceleration  1001

and second-order Fermi acceleration in the downstream turbulence. However, it is
not so easy to solve the resulting equations; simple exact solutions are unknown, but
perturbation methods tend to work rather well. The crucial point is to compare the
time scales. If the time scale associated with the added effect is longer than the
diffusive acceleration time scale found in § 3.2, then the effect can be treated as a
small perturbation in the same way that the adiabatic losses associated with spherical
shocks were treated in § 3 . 3 . If it is shorter, then it is the diffusive acceleration which
must, both physically and mathematically, be treated as a perturbation. Because the
two time scales usually have very different momentum dependencies the effect, in a
first approximation, is simply to fix a cut-off momentum where the two are equal and
above or below which the spectrum has the typical power law form of shock acceler-
ation. This crude rule is probably good enough for most applications. Collisional
losses, adiabatic cooling and synchrotron losses are discussed by Bulanov and Dogel'
(1979); the effect of a collisional-type loss term, -f/r, has been investigated by Volk
et a1 (1981); Webb (in preparation) has studied the effect of second-order Fermi
acceleration and synchrotron losses.

3.5, Effects of higher order in ( U / u )

As has been frequently emphasised the simple theory is correct only to O ( U / u ) .
Actually the transport equation is correct to O ( U / v ) ' (see, for example, Gleeson and
Axford 1967) but the shock matching conditions for oblique shocks are known only
to O ( U / v ) .It is desirable to have a theory correct to higher order, first, for discussions
of injection (cf § 4 . 4 ) and, secondly, for applications involving relativistic shocks.
Unfortunately, this is a very difficult problem as a glance at the pioneering paper of
Peacock (1981) will show. An analytic theory can probably be developed for the
physically rather uninteresting case of a non-relativistic parallel shock, but apart from
this future developments will probably depend on numerical simulations (cf the work
of Ellison (1981)).

4. Non-linear modifications

The previous section dealt extensively with modifications of the basic theory which
did not consider the reaction of the accelerated particles. However, this cannot in
general be$ignored. It is easy to see from the elementary theory that the ratio of the
downstream energetic particle pressure to that upstream is a ( a - 3-yJ-l where a =
3r(r - l)-' is the slope of the power law and y c is the effective specific heat ratio of
the particles ( 5 / 3 for non-relativistic, 4 / 3 for relativistic). Thus in the linear theory
the downstream particle pressure diverges for strong shocks (a+4 ) and the reaction
on the flow must be considered; even for moderate shocks the reaction must be
considered if the upstream particle pressure is comparable to the gas pressure (as is
observed in the interstellar medium). This means that the shock structure must be
self-consistently calculated by including the cosmic-ray pressure in the fluid dynamics
and cannot just be assumed given. Of course, the modification of the shock structure
in turn implies changes in the spectrum of accelerated particles so that this is a highly
non-linear problem.

    There is a second type of reaction effect whch is not so non-linear-the effect of
the energetic particles on the scattering. Streaming of particles through the background
1002                              L O'CDrury

plasma leads to an instability which excites waves. These then produce enhanced
scattering of the particles and, in principle, the particles can themselves generate the
scattering centres needed for their acceleration.

    This quasilinear problem is dealt with first and then the fully non-linear problems
are considered. Throughout this section we consider only parallel one-dimensional
shocks.

4.1. Self-induced scattering

The idea that the upstream scattering required for diffusive acceleration could be
produced by self-excited AlfvCn waves goes back to the paper of Bell (1978a). (There
is no problem downstream, because behind a collisionless shock there is strong
magnetic turbulence which produced plenty of scattering.) H e considered the standard

transport equation (note that the velocity of the scattering centres is U - V where U
is the fluid speed and V is the AlfvCn speed; the self-excited waves all travel in the

same direction as the streaming)

                 at ax ax ax af+ (U- V )- af = -a ( K -a)f (4.1)

with an approximation from quasilinear theory for the diffusion coefficient

                                              4 B2/8.rr                      (4.2)
                                  K ( p ,x ) = -rgv-

                                             3~ Ew

where rg is the particle gyroradius, zi is its velocity and Ew(x,p ) is the energy density
of AlfvCn waves (resonant with particles of momentum p ) per unit logarithmic
bandwidth. The wave intensity is given by

       aEW                               aEw
       -+ (U- V )-= (V-r)Ew                                                  (4.3)
                              at         ax

where

is an approximation from quasilinear theory for the growth rate due to the particle
streaming and I? represents damping of the waves.

    Bell looked for a steady solution of these equations in which there was no damping
of the waves and found the simple solution

       f(x, P ) = f i ( p ) + [ f z ( ~ ) - f i ( ~ ) I-(XlIxn)-'            (4.5)

       Ew(x,p)=--                 v 47r  P 40[fz(p) -fi ( P)I(1-X/xn)-l

                              U-v 3

where

                                                                             (4.6)

    This shows what one would expect: the diffusion coefficient is small near the shock
and increases (in fact, linearly) as one goes away from it. The quantity (47r/3)p4vf(p)
is the pressure per logarithmic bandwidth of particles with momentum p so that the
An introduction to the theory of diffusive shock acceleration  1003

energy density of the excited waves at the shock is exactly the cosmic-ray pressure
increase divided by the AlfvCn Mach number of the scattering centres. It is clear that
the waves become non-linear for strong shocks or if the background magnetic field
is weak (cf § 4.2.2.).

    An interesting aspect of this solution, discovered by Lagage and Cesarsky (1982),
is that the acceleration time scale associated with it is infinite. The reason is easy to
see: the number of accelerated particles in the upstream region at some momentum

                                            0 n ( 0 ,P ) dx

                   I_, 1-x/xo

diverges logarithmically. Thus the mean residence time upstream is infinite and the
solution can never be established as a time-asymptotic state. Of course, in reality the
diffusion coefficient cannot go on increasing indefinitely and some low level of pre-
existing wave activity will provide a cut-off.

4.2. Shock structure

The harder problem, of determining a self-consistent shock structure, can also be
traced back to one of the seminal papers on diffusive shock acceleration, that presented
by W I Axford, E Leer and G Skadron at the 15th International Cosmic Ray
Conference in Plovdiv (1977). This paper is, however, very short; more extensive
discussions can be found in Drury and Volk (1981)and Axford et a1 (1982). Following
these papers, we begin by looking at the simplest possible model in which this question
can be asked.

4.2.1. The two-fluid model. The problem posed, namely how the reaction modifies
the shock structure, is essentially one in fluid dynamics. This suggests that we try an
approach in which the accelerated particles are treated as a fluid and the details of
the spectrum ignored. The background plasma can then be described by the Euler
equations with the reaction of the particles incorporated as an additional cosmic-ray
pressure, Pc, in the momentum equation; thus

                                 9 + - (ap U ) = O

                                           at ax (4.7)

                                                               (4.9)

where p, U,PG and EG are the density, velocity, pressure and internal energy density
of the background gas, respectively. The internal energy density is related to the
pressure through an `adiabatic exponent' or specific heat ratio Y G :

PG= (YG- ~ ) E G                                               (4.10)

(for a monatomic non-relativistic gas with no internal degrees of freedom y G = 5/3).
   The cosmic-ray pressure is given by one `moment' of the distribution function:

                                                               (4.1 1)
1004                                L O'CDrury

and the internal energy density by

                                                        (4.12)

where T is the particle kinetic energy.
    By taking this moment of the transport equation we obtain a 'hydrodynamic'

equation for the cosmic rays:

                                                        (4.13)

where

                                                        (4.14)

is an effective mean diffusion coefficient. Finally, the internal energy density is related
to Pc through an 'adiabatic exponent' yc (4/3 for relativistic, 5/3 for non-relativistic
particles) by

                                    Pc = ( y c - 1)Ec.  (4.15)

    The propagation of small periodic disturbances in this system has been investigated
by Ptuskin (1981). He shows that perturbations with very short wavelengths are
practically decoupled from the cosmic rays and propagate at the gas sound speed,
( ~ G P G / P ) 'w/ ~he,reas very-long-wavelength perturbations couple to the cosmic rays

and travel at the enhanced speed, [(YGPG + y c ~ c ) / p ] 1 / 2 .

    To investigate shock structures in this system we look for steady solutions represent-
ing transitions from one asymptotically uniform state (upstream) to another (down-
stream). Assuming that all time derivatives are zero we can at once write down four
first integrals:

             pU=A                                       (4.16)
                                                        (4.17)
       AU +Pc +PG=B

                                                        (4.18)

                                    PG U yG D.          (4.19)

The first three of these are simply statements of the conservation of mass, momentum
and energy. The last, which states that the gas entropy is constant, is of a less
fundamental nature and will, in general, only hold piece-wise; if a gas sub-shock has
to be inserted in the transition, the entropy will increase there.

    If we assume suitable values for the exponents yG and y c and the mean diffusion
coefficient I? the above system consists of three algebraic equations and one differential
equation in four unknowns. We can use the algebraic equations to eliminate in favour
of one unknown (or combination of unknowns) and reduce the system to a single
first-order ordinary differential equation in one unknown which then gives the shock
structure (for details see Axford et a1 (1982)). An equivalent, but more geometrical,
procedure is to use only the two linear algebraic equations to eliminate the density
and the cosmic-ray pressure from the system and then to study the integral curves of
An introduction to the theory of diffusive shock acceleration  1005

the reduced system in the U, PG plane. This has some advantages in discussing the
insertion of gas sub-shocks.

    In the U, PG plane (see figure 4) the obvious inequalities p 3 0 ,P c 3 0 , P G L0
confine us to the triangular region bounded by the lines U=O, PG=O and P c =
B - A U - P G = O . The energy equation tells us that the diffusive component of the
cosmic-ray energy flux is equal to a quadratic expression in U and PG;thus it vanishes
on a second-order curve in the diagram which is easily seen to be a hyperbola. The
portions of this curve, which will be called the Hugoniot, lying within the triangle
correspond to all possible uniform flows having the same mass, momentum and energy
fluxes as the given one. The initial and final asymptotic states must lie on this curve,
but this is the only information yielded by the conservation laws alone. Of course, if
we specify that one of the pressures vanishes identically, then there are only two
possible states (the intersections of the corresponding side of the triangle with the
hyperbola) which define the normal Rankine-Hugoniot relations.

                                                                           U-

Figure 4. The shock construction described in the text; the figure has been drawn for the case yc = 4/3,
y~ = 5/3,M = 2.0 and N = 0.3 (from Drury and Volk 1981).

    Thus to relate a given upstream state to a downstream state we must provide some
physics beyond the basic conservation laws; in this simple model it consists of the
assumption that the gas entropy only changes at gas sub-shocks and that the mean
diffusion coefficient, K, is positive. In consequence, as the fluid flows through the
transition from one uniform state to another, its state follows a path in the U, PG
diagram (note that this is a standard specific volume-pressure diagram) which consists
of sections of gas adiabats connected by jumps corresponding to sub-shocks. The
jump conditions at such a sub-shock are the ordinary Rankine-Hugoniot conditions
for a pure gas shock, consistent with our assumption that there is no local energetically
significant effect of a gas shock on the cosmic rays. Thus the cosmic-ray pressure and
energy flux are continuous across the shock and the conditions are

[AU +PG]= [Pc]= 0                                              (4.20)
1006                                 L O'CDrury
and

    If we temporarily use angle brackets for a mean as well as square brackets for a
difference, i.e. [U]= U,- U , ( U )= (U2+Ul)/2, and note the identity

      [XY 1= [Xl(Y)+(XXY1                              (4.22)

the second condition can be written

                                                       (4.23)

and, on using the first condition, this simplifies to

      A ( U ) = YG(PG).                                (4.24)

This means that in the U, PGdiagram the jump at a sub-shock must be parallel to
the line Pc = 0 and its mid-paint must lie on the line A U = YGPG. This line is the
`sonic line' where the local velocity equals the local gas sound speed, (YGPG/P)~",
and the jump must be from the supersonic to the subsonic side.

    The sonic line has, however, a second significance; on any given gas adiabat the
cosmic-ray pressure has a single maximum which is attained where the adiabat
intersects this line. This is easily seen by substituting the differential form of the
adiabatic relation, U d P G +Y G P G d U = 0, into the differential form of the momentum
conservation equation:

      dPc = -A d U -dPG = -(A U -YGPG) dU/ U.          (4.25)

In the same way one can show that the quantity

                                                                                                (4.26)

has a single maximum on each gas adiabat when it intersects the line AU =
YGPG+~ C P (Cthis is where the fluid velocity equals the propagation speed of a
long-wavelength disturbance as found by Ptuskin (1981)). Thus, if an adiabat intersects
the Hugoniot, it does so in two points, one on either side of this line.

    We can now classify the possible types of transition (i.e. allowed shock structures)
and obtain generalised Rankine-Hugoniot conditions. The key points are that as a
fluid element goes through the transition its position coordinate, x, must increase
monotonically, that equation (4.18)shows that aPc/ax is positive inside the Hugoniot
curve and negative outside and that we know that on a gas adiabat Pc has a maximum
at the sonic line.

    The simplest possibility is that of a completely smooth transition. In the U, PG
diagram such a structure is represented by a section of a gas adiabat starting and
ending on the Hugoniot. As the path lies inside the Hugoniot where aPc/ax is positive
and as x increases monotonically the cosmic-ray pressure must also increase monotoni-
cally. It follows that such a solution can only exist if the section of adiabat does not
cross the sonic line. This necessary condition is also sufficient because the differential
equation can be inverted and integrated along such a path to yield a smooth shock
structure. The simplest, but important and instructive, example is the cold plasma
limit, P G = 0.
      A n introduction to the theory of diffusive shock acceleration          1007

    The section of gas adiabat then degenerates into part of the U axis and the
integration is elementary. We have

                 AU+Pc=B                                                      (4.27)

and

      1       Yc     upc = c +L5,                                             (4.28)
      -AU2+-
      2       yc- 1       y c - i ax

Thus, on eliminating Pc in favour of U, aU/ax is given by a quadratic in U :

         E-=- % + l ( U - U , ) ( U - U 2 )                                   (4.29)
           ax 2

where the zeros of the quadratic, U1 and U;?,are the upstream and downstream

speeds. An integration then shows that the shock structure is basically a hyperbolic

IxK). tangent velocity profile:
      U ( x )=---Ul+U2 U1-Uz tanh( (1+ Yc)(U1- Uz)  xg ( x 'I                 (4.30)

      2       2

     The integration is elementary because the section of gas adiabat is straight; although

this is exactly true only in the limit PG= 0, it is still a good approximation for weak

shocks where the section of adiabat is so short that its curvature can be neglected.

Thus we also obtain smooth shock structures of the same hyperbolic tangent type in

the limit of infinitesimal shocks; with E = ( U ,- U,)/(U,+ U,)<< 1 the approximate

[ I solution is easily found to be (J F McKenzie, personal communication)
      =) U ( x ) = U 1-E tanh ( E Up+O(E)']                                   (4.31)
                     xo K (x')

with

                                                                              (4.32)

The transition length scale ('the shock thickness') is inversely proportional to the
shock strength and, for small cosmic-ray pressures, directly proportional to Pc. These
infinitesimal shocks travel at the velocity found by Ptuskin for long-wavelength
disturbances:

         U = [(YGPG+'YCpC)/k)]1'2*                                            (4.33)

    Let us now consider the possibility of structures containing embedded gas sub-
shocks. A sub-shock is represented in the diagram by a jump across the sonic line
to the subsonic side. This jump must go directly to a point on the Hugoniot, i.e. the
gas sub-shock must occur at the very end of the transition. To see this, suppose first
that the subshock jumps to a point outside the Hugoniot. Then aPc/ax is negative
and if x is to increase PC must decrease. Thus the adiabatic section following the
sub-shock leads away from the Hugoniot and cannot end before running into the
region Pc<O. If, however, the sub-shock jumps to a point inside the Hugoniot, then
Pc must increase and the adiabat inevitably runs into the sonic line. A second
sub-shock is impossible because jumps must start on the supersonic side of the sonic
1008                                L O'C Drury

line. The only possibility therefore is that the sub-shock jumps directly to the final
downstream state.

    In summary, the cosmic-ray reaction either smooths the shock structure completely,
or the transition consists of a smooth part followed by an ordinary gas shock. The
necessary and sufficient condition for the transition to be smooth is that the flow be
everywhere supersonic. (This agrees with the general theory of Whitham (1974 p 353
et seq).) However, beyond this qualitative description, the above discussion tells us
how to quantitatively relate upstream and downstream states; that is, it allows us to
obtain generalised Rankine-Hugoniot conditions. Of course, they do not have quite
the certainty that attaches to the gas dynamic Rankine-Hugoniot conditions (which
are based only on the fundamental conservation laws) and they leave, as will be seen,
certain questions open, but the value of such information is obvious.

    In detail, the prescription for finding the possible downstream states compatible
with a given upstream state is first to calculate the mass, momentum and energy fluxes
A , B and C. With these values one then constructs the triangle of possible states,
the sonic line and the Hugoniot curve. If the Hugoniot intersects the sonic line, one
also constructs the locus of all points from which a sub-shock jump takes one directly
to the Hugoniot (this curve is the sheared reflection in the sonic line of the Hugoniot,
hence also a hyperbola; for brevity I will call it the reflected Hugoniot). Then one
constructs the gas adiabat through the point representing the upstream state. All
intersections of this adiabat with the reflected Hugoniot or the Hugoniot which lie
on the supersonic side of the sonic line correspond to possible shock structures. One
such intersection is, of course, the point representing the upstream state; this corre-
sponds to the solution of no shock at all, i.e. the downstream state is the same as that
upstream. Excluding this trivial solution it is clear that at least one other solution
exists and that the number of non-trivial solutions must be odd (counting intersections
with the appropriate multiplicity). It is, however, not obvious that the solution is
unique, and indeed an analytic investigation of strong shocks in the limit of small
cosmic-ray pressures (for details see Drury and Volk (1981)),or simply calculation,
shows that in the case yc = 4/3, y G = 5/3 there can exist three possible solutions for
certain upstream conditions. This lack of uniqueness should not be too surprising
(the problem is, after all, non-linear).

    The specification of the upstream state requires four dimensional parameters
(p, U,PG,Pc), but from these only two dimensionless combinations can be formed so
that if we identify all upstream states which are related by pure scaling, the space of
physically significant upstream states is two-dimensional and is conveniently para-
metrised by the shock Mach number M :

      M 2=pU2(YGPG+ yCPC)-l                           (4.34)

(the ratio of the velocity of the shock with respect to the upstream fluid to the

propagation speed of an infinitesimal shock) and the fractional contribution of the

cosmic rays to the total pressure:

                                    N = Pc(PG+Pc)-'.  (4.35)

The structure of the solution space, relative to this parametrisation, is sketched in

figure 5 . The vertical coordinate represents the downstream particle pressure (nor-
malised to the total momentum flux) as a function of N and M over the physically
significant region 0 s N s 1, M 1. This surface has a single cusp point where the
gas adiabat and the reflected Hugoniot intersect with three-point contact and two fold
A n introduction to the theory of diffusive shock acceleration  1009

10  M+

Figure 5. A sketch of the downstream ratio of the particle pressure to the total momentum flux as a
function of the upstream parameters M and N . The dashed line on the surface indicates the approximate
location of the boundary between those solutions with internal gas subshocks and those without.

                                                                                N

Figure 6. Calculated sections of the surface sketched in figure 5 at M =4.0(a), 5.0(6),5 . 5 ( c ) and 6.0(d).
The chain line is an extrapolation from the linear test particle theory. This diagram shows clearly how
non-linear effects enhance the acceleration and lead to multiple solutions in shocks with Mach numbers
greater than about five (from Drury and Volk 1981).
                         U+  %
3 XI
                              0 X+

                              0 X+

                                                          X*

                                                                      (C )

Figure 7. Three examples of shock structures: ( a )M = 2.0, N = 0.3, (6) M = 2.0, N = 0.8, ( c )M = 13.0,
N = 0.3. The adiabatic exponent of the gas is 5/3,of the particles 4/3 and the solhtions have been scaled
to unit mass and momentum fluxes (from Drury and Volk 1981).
An introduction to the theory of diffusive shock acceleration  1011

lines where they intersect with two-point contact. Between the two fold lines there
exist three possible downstream states for every upstream state; at the fold lines two
of these coalesce and disappear. The dashed line marks the boundary between smooth
solctions and those which contain embedded sub-shocks. The results in figure 6 (which
were calculated, not sketched) show sections of this surface at fixed M and figure 7
shows three typical shock structures.

    How should we interpret these results physically? This is a hard question. It is
important to realise that all we have done is to classify the possible downstream states,
if there exist steady solutions and if the simple two-fluid model is applicable; the
stability of these shock structures and the possibility of their creation have not been

discussed. Indeed there are good reasons (see D 4.5) for supposing that if K increases

with p steady solutions cannot exist for strong shocks. Furthermore, the only thing
we know about the cosmic rays in this simple two-fluid model is their pressure; their
number density is unknown and this makes any discussion of, e.g. particle injection,
very difficult. Nevertheless we can draw some tentative conclusions.

    First, and most importantly, the model clearly indicates that shock waves tend to
accelerate cosmic rays with high efficiency. The cosmic-ray diffusion is the major
entropy generation process in both strong and weak shocks; only in moderate shocks
(Mach 3 or so) are sub-shocks important. Taken literally, the model predicts that in
very strong shocks 98"/0 of the incoming kinetic energy is converted to cosmic-ray
energy (with relativistic particles providing the dominant downstream pressure the
shock has a compression ratio of 7 and the fraction of the incoming kinetic energy

not available for conversion is 7-* - 2%). While this almost certainly pushes the

model beyond its limits of validity (unless K is bounded) it shows that there is no
obvious reason why the acceleratior? efficiency should be low.

    A second important point is that the reaction modifies the acceleration in two
ways (a point noted by Blandford (1979)). The smoothing of the shock decreases the
acceleration (this is the effect one intuitively expects) but there is also a second, more
subtle, effect which can increase the acceleration. If, as will normally be the case, the
cosmic rays have a 'softer' equation of state than the gas ( y c < y G ) a cosmic-ray-
dominated shock will have a larger compression ratio than a gas-dominated shock;
the additional acceleration due to this increased compression can more than com-
pensate for that lost due to the smoothing.

    The conflict between these two effects provides a plausible physical explanation
for the occurrence of multiple solutions in strong shocks with small upstream cosmic-
ray pressure: either the structure is essentially that of a gas shock and the cosmic-ray
pressure, though amplified, is small or the shock is cosmic-ray-dominated with the
resulting increased acceleration itself producing this domination; between these two
stable states there exists a third unstable state which, if perturbed, tends either to the
gas-dominated or the cosmic-ray-dominated state. This accords with the fact that, if
the upstream cosmic-ray pressure is too high, the only solution is the cosmic-ray-
dominated one.

4.2.2. The two-fluid model with waves. The simple model analysed above assumes
that the scattering of particles occurs from centres which move with the velocity of
the fluid so that there is, in effect, a direct coupling between the cosmic rays and the
gas. This is possible (for example, if the centres are tangential discontinuities), but
we expect the scattering to be caused mainly by waves moving with respect to the
gas. McKenzie and Volk (1981,1982) and Volk and McKenzie (1981) have shown
that, if these waves are AlfvCn waves, they can be explicitly incorporated into a simple
1012      L O'CDrury

`hydrodynamical' model which, as well as yielding a non-linear version of Bell's result
for the wave generation, indicates how the approximation of neglecting the wave
velocity could be justified.

    As before we consider for simplicity a steady parallel shock and write down the
three conservation laws:

                 pU=A                                             (4.36)
                                                                  (4.37)
      AU +PG +Pc+ Pw =B                                           (4.38)
      $AU' +FG+F~ +F~ = C.

The subscripts G, C and W refer to gas, cosmic rays and waves, the F are energy
fluxes and the P are the pressures.

    The gas energy flux consists of advection of the associated internal energy density
EG with the fluid velocity U plus a pressure work term:

          FG = UEG+ UPG.                                          (4.39)

The cosmic-ray energy flux consists of the advection of internal energy at the velocity
of the scattering centres, U - V,plus a pressure work term plus a diffusive flux:

                                                                  (4.40)

Finally the wave energy flux consists of the wave energy density advected at (U - V )
plus the pressure work term:

      Fw = (U - V ) E w+ UPw.                                     (4.41)

The internal energies can be related to the pressures by

                                       PC,G = ( 7 C . G - 1)EC,G  (4.42)
and assuming the waves are AlfvCn waves:

              E w = 2Pw                                           (4.43)

(see Dewar 1970; also Xiaoqing and Mutao 1982).
    This gives a system of five unknowns (p, U and the three pressures) related by

three conservation equations; to complete the system we need the equations describing
the energy exchanges between the three components. These are

                                                                  (4.44)

the divergence of the gas energy flux is the rate at which the fluid does work against
the gas pressure gradient plus the wave dissipation, L :

          -a F-c - ( U - V ) - .JPC                               (4.45)
          ax             ax

The divergence of the cosmic-ray energy flux is the rate at which the scattering centres
do work against the cosmic-ray pressure gradient:

      aFw apw aPc
      -= U-+ v--L.                                                (4.46)
      ax      ax         ax
    A n introduction to the theory of diffusiveshock acceleration  1013

The divergence of the wave energy flux is the rate at which the fluid does work against
the wave pressure gradient plus the wave excitation by the cosmic-ray streaming minus
the dissipation. Of course, these equations are not independent; if any two are
assumed, the third can be deduced by using the differentiated forms of the conservation
laws. The system is closed by prescribing some form for the dissipation, L , and noting

that in a parallel shock the AlfvCn speed, V a U1".Clearly, the key feature which

enables us to write down this system of equations is that AlfvCn waves are non-
dispersive; however, it seems plausible that, even if dispersive waves were important
sources of scattering, these equations, with V interpreted as a `mean wave speed',
could be used as an approximate model.

    The simplest case to consider is L = 0, i.e. no wave dissipation. The wave energy
exchange equation can then be integrated to obtain a non-linear version of Bell's
expression for the energy of the waves excited by the particle streaming. We have

                     a           apW aPc
                     -[(3U-2V)Pw-j=U-+V-                           (4.47)
                     ax          ax                  ax

or

                         apw a                           apC
                 2( U - V )-+ Pw -(3U-2 V )= v-.                   (4.48)
                         ax  ax                          ax

Using the relation, U OC V 2 ,we find that the integrating factor for the LHS is (U - V ) /V
and thus

                 a                        apC a
                 -[2(U- V)'Pw/ VI = ( U - V )-=-Fc.                (4.49)
                 ax                       ax ax

It follows that

                         ( U - V)' Ew =Fc +constant                (4.50)

                             V

(the energy equation can be used to eliminate Fc on the RHS; this gives the expression
found by McKenzie and Volk). In agreement with the linear calculation of Bell, this
shows that a fraction of the order of V / U of the energy given to the cosmic rays goes
into exciting the waves.

    This sounds relatively harmless and one is tempted to say that in the limit V<cU
the wave excitation can be neglected and the simple two-fluid model used. This would,
however, be premature: the problem is that the energy deposited in the waves, although
small relative to the cosmic-ray energy, is much larger than that in the background
magnetic field; the energy density available in the shock is of the order of i p y 2 , if
the acceleration is efficient this implies a wave energy density of the order of fpUV
whereas the background magnetic-field energy density is $pV2,Clearly, if V << U,the
waves become non-linear very near the start of the shock structure unless the shock
is inefficient. What happens thereafter is an interesting but unanswered question?.

f I think it probable (but this is only speculation) that the magnetic field becomes so disordered that any
attempt to decompose it into waves yields as many travelling forwards as backwards, the mean wave speed
drops to zero and the irregularities stop growing. To put it another way, if the field is sufficiently disordered
its irregularities are tied to the background plasma and cannot propagate through it like small-amplitude
waves. However, it has been argued that just the opposite occurs, that the wave phase speed increases
(Morrison et a1 1981) due to `trapping' effects (cf Volk and McKenzie 1981) and presumably diffusion is
then an inappropriate model for the particle transport.
1014  L O'CDrury

One possibility, which at least has the merit of allowing a relatively straightforward
mathematical analysis, is to suppose that some efficientdamping process transfers the
excess energy from the waves to the gas.

4.2.3. Two-fluid model with strongly damped waves. If we assume that some,
unspecified, damping process keeps the wave energy density (and hence also the wave
pressure) small in comparison to the other energy densities the system of equations
derived above can be simplified to

             pU=A                      (4.51)

      AU +PC-k PG=B
      $ A U+~F~+FG= c

    This system can be analysed using a U, PG diagram in exactly the same way as
the simple two-fluid model and clearly in the limit V<cU the two theories become
identical. The differences are quantitative rather than qualitative; the Hugoniot is
not a simple hyperbola, but a curve which looks like a hyperbola (at least that part
which lies inside the triangle of physical states) and instead of gas adiabats one has
to use the integral curves of the energy transfer equation; the conclusions derived
from the two-fluid model are essentially unchanged.

4.3. Non-linear eflects on the particle spectrum

The simple hydrodynamic models discussed in the last subsection give some idea of
how the shock structure reacts to the acceleration of energetic particles. The next
problem is to see how this change in the structure influences the acceleration process
and the spectrum of the accelerated particles. There are three obvious ways of tackling
this problem; by looking for exact solutions, by trying asymptotic and perturbation
expansions and by numerical methods. The first two of these have yielded useful
information, the last has only begun to be applied, but will obviously be important
in the future.

4.3.1. A n exuct solution, There is one special case of acceleration at a modified shock
where a complete consistent solution is known (Drury et a1 1982; see also Blandford
and Payne 1981). The key point is that the steady-state transport equation

        af a af 1aU af                 (4.52)

      U -a=x - Ka-x- +a-x- P -3 ax ap

can be solved, in the sense that a useful expression can be found for the Green function
relating the upstream and downstream spectra, if the velocity U and the diffusion
coefficient K are related by
An introduction to the theory o f diffusive shock acceleration             1015

where P is a constant. However, with P = (yc+ 1)/2 this is exactly the shock structure
equation of 0 4.2 (the 'cold' plasma limit leading to smooth hyperbolic tangent type
velocity transitions) and with P given by (4.32)the same equation applies in the weak

shock limit. Thus in these cases a consistent analytic solution is possible if the diffusion

coeficient is independent of momentum (so that I? = K ) .
    To derive this solution we begin by changing the independent spatial variable from

x to U so that (4.52)becomes

                                                                           (4.54)

The Euler operator p a / @ suggests a Mellin transform:

                                                                           (4.55)

and on using (4.53)we obtain the ordinary differential equation

                                                                                                (4.56)

which has three regular singular points (at U1, U2,CO) and can thus be reduced to
Gauss's hypergeometric equation. The boundary conditions are applied at two of
these singular points (g must be finite at U , and is known at VI) and the solution is

                                                                                                     (4.57)

where

                                                                           (4.58)

                                            1 U2
                                  c = l+--

                                     P U1-Uz

(for the theory of the hypergeometric equation see, for example, Whittaker and
Watson (1902)). Thus

                                                                           (4.59)

and it follows from the convolution theorem for the Mellin transform that  (4.60)

               lom

                                 f A P ) = f l ( P ' ) G ( P / P ' )dP'/P

where G ( p / p ' ) , the Green function or spectrum produced by a monoenergetic
upstream spectrum, is given by

                                                                           (4.61)
1016        L O'CDrury

In evaluating this integral it is convenient to set

                             s = In ( P l P ' )

                                                     (4.62)

                        u1,2

         x 1 , 2 = ~U1 - U2

                        U1 + U2

         x 3 =x1 +x2 =-

                         U1 - U2

the integration contour can then be deformed and the integral expressed as a sum of
residues at the poles of one of the gamma functions with the result

for s >0 and G = 0 for s G 0. This rather complicated expression (which is, however,

easy to compute as the terms in the series satisfy simple recurrence relations) shows
that an upstream monoenergetic spectrum produces downstream a spectrum which is
zero below the injection energy (no deceleration) and which consists of an infinite
sum of power laws (in momentum) above this energy.

      1  1

Figure 8. The downstream spectrum produced from an upstream delta distribution centred on po by

diffusive acceleration in a hyperbolic tangent type velocity transition of compression ratio 7 . Solutions are
shown for five values of the dimensionless diffusion coefficient p : (1)0.1, (2) 0.5, (3) 1.0, (4) 2.0, (5)10.0
(from Drury er al 1982).
A n introduction to the theory of diffusive shock acceleration  1017

    Figure 8 shows the result of a numerical evaluation of this spectrum for the case
where the overall compression ratio of the shock is seven and five values of p. This

parameter can be regarded as a dimensionless diffusion coefficient; in the limit p + CO

the diffusion length scale is much larger than the shock thickness, the first term of

the series dominates, the gamma functions disappear and

                 G + 3x1exp (-3~x1)                             (4.64)

which is, of course, the result found in the simple theory. But whereas that derivation
assumed the shock to be thin compared to the particle gyroradius, this shows that in
fact the result holds under the much weaker condition that the shock be thin compared

to the diffusion length. In the other extreme, p + 0, diffusion is relatively unimportant

and the spectrum is the upstream delta distribution shifted by adiabatic compression
a factor of the cube root of the compression ratio in momentum and broadened a

little. However, in the consistent cases, p is of order unity (the diffusion length then

determines the shock thickness). Perhaps the most interesting feature of the solutions
is that, although the spectrum is not a simple power law, it can be very well approxi-
mated by one at momenta more than a few times the injection momentum; this is
clear from figure 8 and is a consequence of the rapid convergence of the series (4.63)
at large s. This asymptotic power law spectrum has a slope of

                 -3x1(1 + x d P )                               (4.65)

i.e. steeper than in an unmodified shock of the same compression ratio.
    It is also possible to derive an asymptote for the low momentum end of the

spectrum and to show from the spectrum that particle number is conserved and that
the pressure has the value required by the hydrodynamic equations; the details can
be found in the original papers.

4.3.2. The high-energy asymptotic spectrum. We were able to find a solution of the
transport equation in the last subsection only by assuming that the diffusion coefficient
was momentum-independent. In reality K will normally be an increasing function of

p . For example, the energy dependence of the primary to secondary ratio in the
galactic cosmic rays is usually taken as evidence that their diffusion coefficient has a
power law dependence on momentum, K ap",with a in the range 0.3-0.5. In any
case K must eventually increase because it is bounded from below by the monotonically
increasing value for Bohm diffusion ( K 5 K B =fr,v). This suggests that if there is a
steady shock structure with length scale L and velocities of the order of U, it might
be useful to look for asymptotic expansions of the high-energy end of the spectrum
by treating K / L Uas a large parameter.

    For simplicity let us suppose K = ~ ~ ( p / pw~he) r"e KO/LU>> 1and p o is so high that
there are no pre-existing cosmic rays at momenta p >po. The problem is to study the
asymptotic form of the solution of the steady transport equation (4.52) for p >po.
For 1x1>: L, i.e. far upstream and downstream, dU/dx = 0 and the transport equation
simplifies to the diffusion-advection equation. Thus upstream:

and downstream:
1018                                 L O'CDrury

Let g = In f, s = In ( p / p o ) ;then (4.52) becomes

                                                                       (4.68)

We now make the ansatz g = giK-i and obtain the recurrence relations

a2gi i a--g+j--a-ggii--l-j-- 1d u a  ( i - 1 ) d U gi-1- U -a gi-l= 0  i = 0, 1 , 2 . . ,
                                     3 dx              ax
T+                                                                                  (4.69)

ax i=oax ax 3 dx as

The boundary conditions on the gi(x,s) follow from the large x behaviour o f f :

      X++W gi(x,s)+gt(s) i=O, 1,2,. ..

      X+-W                           gi(x,s)+g;(s) i = o , 2 , 3,...   (4.70)

                                     g1(x, s ) + g; (s) + UlX.

The first equation, i = 0, is

                                                                       (4.71)

with solution                                                          (4.72)
                                                                       (4.73)
The next equation is

                             -a-2-g+1---i=aogo,.d u

                                        ax2 3 as dx
Integrating and using the boundary conditions

                                                                       (4.74)

and if we choose the x origin such that

                                                                       (4.75)

then                                                                   (4.76)
Thus

                                                                       (4.77)

using the notation of § 4.3.1.
   Proceeding to i = 2

      -a2-g2                                           1d U            (4.78)
      ax 2 -x1x2(U1-U)(U-U*)+-- 3 dx
       An introduction to the theory of diffusive shock acceleration  1019

Integrating once and using the boundary conditions we obtain an equation for the s
dependence of gl:

where                                                                 (4.79)
                                                                      (4.80)
The solution is                                                       (4.81)

                         Q,             Q $0

                 g: =;Xi(3Xz+ff)

                 s: = --3XlX2Q,S        a =o

where we have dropped terms which only add a constant to g.
    Thus the solution to first order is

                                                                                                  (4.82)
or

                                                                                                  (4.83)

It is interesting to note that this agrees with the exact solution found in § 4.3.1; if
a = 0 and K dUldx = +(Ul - U ) ( U - U,) then Q, = K/P, g: = -3x1x2~s//3 and the
high-energy spectral slope is -3,y1(1 + x 2 / / 3 ) .

    However, if K increases with p , a >0, then the asymptotic slope is that predicted
by the simple theory (as it clearly should be; but the point is of some importance as
we will see). In principle, the series could be continued to higher orders, but the
algebra grows at an alarming rate and there is no reason to suppose that the result
would be very useful.

4.3.3. Blandford's perturbation solution. A different approach has been taken by
Blandford (1980) who regards the cosmic-ray reaction as a small perturbation and
simultaneously expands the shock structure and the spectrum in powers of the ratio
of the downstream cosmic-ray pressure to the kinetic momentum flux. This has the
obvious disadvantage of only working when the shock is an inefficient accelerator of
cosmic rays (a circumstance which the considerations of 0 4.2 suggest is rarely the
case) and leads to rather complicated algebra. However, it does yield more information
in those cases where it is applicable than the analyses of Pg4.2 and 4.3.2.

    We begin by supposing that in terms of a small parameter E we can make the
expansions:

                 U = U ( o ) + E U ( 1 ) + E 2 U. .( 2 ) .

                 f =Ef(o)+E2f(1j+. . ,                                (4.84)

                                     W

                 Pc=l0 $p'vfdp=O+~P:)+ ...
1020                               L O'CDrury

    On inserting these into the transport and dynamic equations to zeroth order we
obtain the simple theory of acceleration at a gas shock with no reaction. Thus from
§ 2 . 3 . 1 the solution is (for simplicity we assume K independent of x )

                                                                       (4.85)

where ,yl = Ul/(Ul- U,) and U\::,  are related by the Rankine-Hugoniot condi-

tions.

To obtain the first-order corrections to the shock structure it is convenient to use

the integrated forms of the mass and momentum conservation laws:

              pU=A                                                     (4.86)

        A U +PG +P c =B.

   The two scaling degrees of freedom can be used to hold A and B constant (so

that they do not need to be expanded) and, following Blandford, we will also hold
the shock (gas) Mach number constant (thus U1= U:"',PG1= P g ! ) . By using the
adiabatic relation P G = U-' it is then easy to show that upstream

        U`" = -U(O)

                            1

        Pg' =yPg:6(x)                                                  (4.87)

        P g ) =(AV?'- ? P $ \ ) ~ ( x )

where we define E by imposing the condition 6(0)= 1 . Thus

                                                                                                  (4.88)

Applying the Rankine-Hugoniot conditions to the sub-shock we then obtain the
(x- independent) downstream perturbations

                                       P g : = yPg: - 2AU`,"'          (4.89)
                                      pCc2') --AU\O) - y P g :

(note that AU:" +P g ; +Pgi = 0 as required by the constancy of B ) .

    The first-order terms in the transport equations give

                                                                       (4.90)
               A n introduction to the theory o f diffusive shock acceleration  1021

i.e. the spectral correction is obtained by solving the zeroth-order transport equation

with a source term representing the non-linear effects. The results of 0 2.3.1 allow

us to write down the Green function for the zeroth-order transport equation with an
upstream source, S ( x - x ' ) S ( p - p ' ) with x ' s O :

                       1

  G ( x ,p , x ',p ' ) = -[I- exp ( U I X /11K

                      U1

                       x{exp ( U l ( x - x ' ) / ~ l H ( x ' - x ) + H ( x- x ' ) } H ( - x ) S ( p - p ' )

in terms of which the first-order correction can be expressed purely in terms of

quadratures :

                    lop 0                                                       (4.92)

               f`%, p ) = -m dx' d p ' G ( x ,P , x ' ,P ' M xP'',) .

    The simplest case to consider is that where K is independent of p . Then O ( x ) =
exp ( U : " X / Ka)nd the source term

The parameter T = yP$;/AU:O' is, as in Blandford's paper, the inverse square Mach
number of the shock. Thus, the downstream perturbation to the spectrum:

                f`l'(0,P ) =f`o)`(Po),3xlCy2/2 - 2Tx1)In ( P l P O )            (4.94)

and to first order

               f ( O , p ) = f(O)+Ef(l)

                                                                                (4.95)

We see that for weak shocks the spectrum steepens but for strong shocks it flattens.
The above expression agrees with that found by Blandford if a misprint in his equation
(21) is corrected.

    The case ~ c c cpan~also be considered, but the integrals involved have to be
performed numerically. However, one can easily see that if K is an increasing function
of p the downstream spectral slope at high momenta will be that appropriate to the
overall compression ratio of the transition:

                                                                                (4.96)

whereas at low momenta it teiids to that appropriate to the compression ratio of the
sub-shock:
1022                              L 0'CDrury

4.4. Injection and selective acceleration

It seems very probable, both on theoretical grounds (the collective processes which

heat the plasma within a collisionless shock do not necessarily produce Maxwellian

distributions) and by extrapolation from observations of the Earth's bow shock, that

if the shock structure contains a collisionless sub-shock this injects particles from the

background plasma into the diffusive acceleration mechanism. However, it is very

hard to quantify this effect, although interesting attempts have been made by Eichler

(1979), Bulanov and Dogel' (1979) and Krymsky (1981) analytically and by Ellison

(1981)numerically: while all agree that injection from the thermal background allows

a strong shock, even with no upstream `seed' cosmic rays, to accelerate cosmic rays

`efficiently'this result must largely be attributed to their common assumption that the

process which scatters the high-energy particles is the same as that which heats the

background plasma (whereas very different interactions could be involved). Until we

have some theoretical understanding of the microscopic structure of a quasi-parallel

collisionless shock we can probably do no better than follow Bell (1978b) and assume

that some small fraction (say,    of the thermal particles advected into the shock

obtain enough energy to enter the diffusive mechanism (cf Sonnerup 1979). From

various observational constraints the existence of such a process is probably essential

if diffusive shock acceleration is to be regarded as a viable theory for the origin of

the galactic cosmic rays, a point emphasised by Eichler (1980).

An interesting aspect (Eichler 1979, Ellison 1981), assuming injection to exist, is

the question of selectivity in the acceleration: how is the composition of the accelerated

particle at high energies related to that of the background plasma? There are clearly

two effects here; the initial injection could be selective and if the shock structure has

been modified the acceleration from the injection energy up to the observation energy

will select those species with larger diffusion coefficients. Both effects suggest that

the abundance of a species in the high-energy particles relative to that in the plasma

should be a smooth, and probably increasing, function of its mass to charge ratio, but

as with the injection itself there exists no quantitative theory.

The phenomenological approach to injection suggested above can, of course, be

incorporated into the two-fluid model of the shock structure discussed in 9: 4.2 (H J

Volk, personal communication). One simply says that a fraction @ ( O s8 < 1)of the

kinetic energy dissipated in the sub-shock goes into cosmic-ray energy so that the

sub-shock jump conditions become

                          [Pc]=O [Fc]=-8[$AU2]                     (4.98)

or, in terms of the gas,

                                   A[ U ]+[Pa]= 0                  (4.99)
                                +A[U*]+ (1- e )[FG]= 0

                                   - 0 +erc)(v=)yc(pa).

Thus the jump in the U, PG diagram is still parallel to Pc = 0, but its midpoint now

lies on the new line (assuming e to be a constant):

With this new line one can then construct a new reflected Hugoniot and carry out the

construction of § 4.2. However, whereas in 0 4.2 the existence of at least one non-trivial
           An introduction to the theory of diffusiveshock acceleration              1023

solution was guaranteed, with 8 >0 there exist some upstream states with no non-trivial

solutions. The problem is that the cosmic-ray pressure still reaches its maximum on
each gas adiabat at the old sonic line whereas weak subshocks, because of the energy
drain due to injection, travel at less than the sound speed. The effect probably does
not have much physical significance, but it serves as a warning not to assume that
steady solutions must exist, a point examined in the next subsection.

    Eichler (1979) claims, on the basis of his simplified model, that the reaction
regulates the injection so that the overall acceleration efficiency is kept at about 50%.
This is a very appealing idea, but unfortunately reaction effects are more complicated
than his model allows (see the next subsection) so that without further work his
conclusions cannot be accepted.

4.5. Pressure divergence in non-linear shocks

In § 4.2 we discussed how the reaction of the accelerated particles, expressed in terms
of a non-zero cosmic-ray pressure, could modify steady shock structures. Then in
§ 4.3 we examined particle acceleration in these modified steady shocks. We must
now check whether this is consistent and the spectral modifications are compatible
with the assumed cosmic-ray pressures., When we do this we find that we are led to
a contradiction if K increases with p and the shock is strong. The problem is simple:
if we assume a strong shock accelerating cosmic rays to have a steady structure, then
because of the cosmic rays' softer equation of state the overall compression ratio of
the transition will exceed four; but if K increases withp then the high-energy asymptotic
slope of the spectrum is determined by the overall compression ratio. It will thus be
flatter than f ( p )C C P - ~and the pressure integral

                      P ~ = ? [ ~ ~ p d~p v f

will diverge. We are forced to conclude that no steady structure can exist for strong

shocks accelerating cosmic rays unless K is bounded from above (or additional effects

are incorporated, e.g. a loss mechanism at high energies, which can provide a suitable

cut-off).

It is interesting to speculate about what sort of unsteady structure such a shock

might have; the obvious alternatives are that the structure is periodic or that it changes

secularly. I know of no detailed solutions relevant to this problem, but some informa-

tion can be gleaned from the time dependence calculation of § 3.2.

Let us suppose that the diffusion coefficient K ~ p an"d consider a burst of particles

with momentum p Oreleased at t = 0 into an unmodified shock. The particle spectrum

at the shock is then  -3x*

                      fa(:) p(t,p7pO)                                                (4.101)

in the notation of § 3.2. But if a >O, then at large times the system 'forgets' the
injection momentum and the acceleration time distribution tends to a self-similar form:

                      CP (t,P, PO) + t,lG(t/ta)                                      (4.102)

where the acceleration time t a K K CCp". The cosmic-ray pressure at the shock:

                      P C KjOp m3 ( " c - x 1 ) ~( t ,P,PO)dplp                      (4.103)

where yc = 4/3 if the particles are relativistic, 5/3 if they are non-relativistic.
1024                              L O'CDrury
    Thus, as t + a,

                          t3(rc-xl)lu-l         (4.104)

    An alternative microscopic derivation of this power law time dependence is perhaps
more convincing. The particles gain momentum at a rate

                                                (4.105)

so that

                                  p at 'I",     (4.106)

On the other hand, the number of particles, N , decreases due to escape so that

                          N       -3xz a -3xJa  (4.107)

and these remaining particles occupy a region of width L a K / Uat around the shock.

Thus the pressure:

                          - t3(vc-xl)/a-l       (4.108)

The interesting aspect here is that the particle pressure can continue to increase

after the injection has been switched off if cy <3(yC-x1). This of course assumes the

shock to be infinitesimally thin; if we broaden the transition the momentum gain

decreases, the escape rate increases and at some finite thickness the pressure growth

rate will be zero. This suggests that there may exist strong shock solutions where

there is no injection or advection of fresh particles, but where an ever decreasing

number of ever more energetic particles maintain a constant downstream pressure

and a shock structure whose width increases linearly with time. If the particles are

relativistic and the overall compression of the secularly broadening transition is close

to the steady value of seven this requires cy < O S . Interestingly, the particles which

escape form a power law spectrum           so that this may be a way to get spectra

flatter than 4. Any further discussion would involve us in too much speculation, but

these simple arguments do suggest that both secular and periodic shock structures

need to be investigated.

5. Concluding remarks

As stated in the introduction, and as I hope the presentation in 9 2.3 has shown, the
central idea of diffusive shock acceleration is simple and persuasive. Assuming that
the accelerated particles could be treated as reactionless 'test particles' and their
transport as diffusive we found that a steady parallel plane shock produced a distribu-
tion function which was a power law in momentum. In 9 3 we then showed that, as
A n introduction to the theory of diffusive shock acceleration  1025

long as the particles are fast and can return across the shock, the obliquity of the
magnetic field is unimportant and that, at root because the acceleration is a con-
sequence of Liouville's theorem, the sole determinant of the spectral slope is the
compression of the plasma in the shock. However, the acceleration time scale and
the spectral deviations induced by, for example, curvature of the shock, do depend
on other factors, in particular the diffusion coefficient.

    Unfortunately, the reaction of the accelerated particles cannot be neglected if they
contribute significantly to the total pressure (as they must if the acceleration is efficient).
One consequence of including recoil terms is that if the diffusion is supposed to occur
through scattering off resonant AlfvCn waves these rapidly become non-linear in all
except weak shocks as shown in $84.1 and 4.2.2. If we ignore this problem and
assume, as in the rest of $ 4, that diffusive transport remains a valid approximation
the reaction effects would be reasonably well understood were the diffusion coefficient
constant, or at least bounded. Unfortunately this is only a convenient fiction. In
reality it must increase and, because of the high-energy divergence of the particle
pressure that this would cause if the shock were steady, acceleration by strong shocks
must be treated as a time-dependent problem. Nor, at the other end of the spectrum,
does there exist a satisfactory theory for the injection of particles from the thermal
background into the diffusive acceleration mechanism.

    Until these gaps in our understanding are filled (and this should be possible with
modern numerical and analytical methods) it is hard to pass any final judgment on
diffusive shock acceleration. However, it is worth noting that the problems which
afflict the theory arise mainly from the fact that as an accelerator the mechanism is
too good; presumably Nature is better than we are at finding ways of keeping it in
check, but it is hard to see how the basic mechanism could be completely suppressed.
I remain optimistic that with the discovery of diffusive shock acceleration we have
made a step towards understanding the seventy year old problem of the origin of
cosmic radiation.

Ref erencest

Achterberg B 1981 PhD Thesis University of Utrecht
Achterberg B and Norman C 1980 Astron. Astrophys. 89 353-63
Alekseev I I and Kropotkin A P 1970 Geomagn. Aeronom. 10 777-83
Axford W I 1980 Proc. IAUIIUPAP Symp. No 94 (Dordrecht: D Reidel) pp 339-58

-1981a Proc. 10th Texas Symp. on RelativisticAstrophysics,Baltimore. Ann. NYAcad. Sci. 375 297-313
-1981b Proc. Int. School and Workshop on Plasma Astrophysics, Varenna. European Space Agency

     SP-161, pp 425-49
Axford W I, Leer E and McKenzie J F 1982 Astron. Astrophys. 111 317-25

Axford W I, Leer E and Skadron G 1977 Proc. 15th Int. Cosmic Ray Conf., Plovdiv vol 11 (Budapest:

     Central Research Institute for Physics) pp 132-7

Bell A R 1978a Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 182 147-56

-1978b Mon. Not. R . Astron. Soc. 182 443-55

Blandford R D 1979 Particle AccelerationMechanisms in Astrophysics,La Jolla. AIPConf. Proc. 56 335-50
-1980 Astrophys. J. 238 410-6
Blandford R D and Ostriker J P 1978 Astrophys. J. 221 L29-32

Blandford R D and Payne D G 1981 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 194 1041-55

Bulanov S V and Dogel' V A 1979 Pis. Astron. Z h . 5 521-5 (Engl. trans]. Sou. Astron. Lett. 5 278-81)

t Only selected references are listed here. For an almost complete bibliography to mid-1981, see Axford

( 198 1b).
1026  L O'CDrury

C a d M and Paul J A 1980 Astrophys. J. 237 236-43
de Hoffmann F and Teller E 1950 Phys. Rev. 80 692-703
Dewar R L 1970 Phys. Fluids 13 2710-20
Dolginov A S and Toptyghin I N 1966 Zzu. Akad. Nauk SSSR Ser. Fiz. 30 1780-3 (Engl. transl. Bull.

     Acad. Sci. USSR, Phys. Ser. 30 1852-5)
Dorman L I and Freidman G I 1959 Problems of MHD and Plasma Physics, Riga (Riga: Verlag Akad.

     Wiss. Lett. SSR) p 77
Drury L O'C, Axford W I and Summers D 1982 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 198 833-41
Drury L O'C and Volk H J 1981 Astrophys. J. 248 344-51
Eichler D 1979 Astrophys. J. 229 419-23

-1980 Astrophys. J. 237 809-13

Ellison D 1981 PhD Thesis The Catholic University of America, Washington DC
Fermi E 1949 Phys. Reu. 75 1169-74 ( = Collected Papers vol I1 pp. 655-66).

-1954 Astrophys. J. 119 1-6 ( =Collected Papers vol I1 pp. 970-7).

Fisk L A 1969 PhD Thesis University of California, San Diego

-1971J. Geophys. Res. 76 1662-72

Forman M and Morfill G 1979 Proc. 16th In!. Cosmic Ray Conf., Kyoto vol 5 (Tokyo: Institute for Cosmic
     Ray Research) p 328 (Abstract only)

Ginzburg V L and Ptuskin V S 1981 Proc. 27th Znt. Cosmic Ray Conf., Paris vol 2 (Saclay: Service de

     Documentation du CEN) pp 336-9
Gleeson L J and Axford W I 1967 Astrophys. J. 149 L115-8
Hoyle F 1960 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 120 338-59
Hudson P Is 1965 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 131 23-50

-1967 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 137 205-20

Jokipii J R 1966 Astrophys. J. 143 961-79

-1968 Astrophys. J. 152 799-808

Kahn F D 1975 Proc. 24th Znt. Cosmic Ray Conf.,Munchen vol 11 (Munchen: MPI fur Extraterrestrishe
     Physik) pp 3566-91

Krymsky G F 1977 Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR 234 1306-8 (Engl. transl. Sou. Phys.-Dokl. 23 327-8)

-1981 Zzv. Akad. Nauk SSSR Ser. Fiz. 45 461-73

Krymsky G F, Kuzmin A I, Petukhov S I and Turpanov A A 1979 Proc. 16th In!. Cosmic Ray Conf..

     Kyoto vol 2 (Tokyo: Institute for Cosmic Ray Research) pp 39-43
Krymsky G F and Petukhov S I 1980 Pis. Astron. Zh. 6 227-31 (Engl. transl. Sou. Astron. Lett. 6 124-6)
Lagage P 0 and Cesarsky C J 1981 Proc. Int. School and Workshop on Plasma Astrophysics, Varenna.

     European Space Agency SP-161, pp 317-8

-1983 Astron. Astrophys. 118 223-8

Lighthill J 1978 Waves in Fluids (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press)
Longair M S 1981 High Energy Astrophysics (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press)
Lust R 1955a 2.Naturf. 8a 277-84

-1955b Z. Natu$. 10a 125-35

McKenzie J F and Volk H J 1981 Proc. 17th In!. Cosmic Ruy Conf., Paris vol 9 (Saclay: Service de
     Documentation du CEN) pp 242-5

-1982 Astron. Astrophys. 116 191-200

Michel F C 1981 Astrophys. J. 247 664-70

Morrison P J, Scott J S, Holman G D and Ionson J A 1981 Steward Observatory Preprint No 316
Parker E N 1958 Phys. Rev. 109 1328-44

-1965 Planet Space Sci. 13 9-49

Peacock J A 1981 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 196 135-52
Prishchep V L and Ptuskin V S 1981 Astron. Zh. 58 779-89 (Engl. transl. Sou. Astron. 25 446-50)
Ptuskin V S 1981 Astrophys. Space Sci. 76 265-78
Schatzman E 1963 Ann. Astrophys. 26 234-49
Scholer M and Morfill G E 1975 Solar Phys. 45 227-40
Shabanskii V P 1961 Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 41 1107-11 (Engl. transl. Sou. Phys.-JETP 14 791-3)
Skilling J 1975 Mon. Not. R. h t r 0 n . Soc. 172 557-66
Sonnerup B U 0 1969 J. Geophys. Res. 74 1 3 0 1 4
Terasawa T 1979 Planet. Space Sci. 27 193-201
Tidman D A and Krall N A 1971 Shock Waves in CollisionlessPlasmas (New York: Wiley)
Toptyghin I N 1980 Space Sci. Rev. 26 157-213
An introduction to the theory of diffusive shock acceleration  1027

Vasilyev V N, Toptygin I N and Chirkov A G 1980 Kosm. Zssled. 18 556-66 (Engl. transl. Cosmic Res.
     18 401-10)

Volk H J 1973 Astrophys. Space Sci. 25 471-90
Volk H J and McKenzie J F 1981 Proc. 17th Znt. Cosmic Ray Conf., Paris vol 9 (Saclay: Service de

     Documentation du CEN) pp 246-9

Volk H J, Morfill G E and Forman M A 1981 Astrophys. J. 249 161-75
Webb G, Forman M A and Axford W I 1982 Astrophys. J. submitted
Webb G, Axford W I and Terasawa T 1983 Astrophys. J . to appear
Whitham G B 1974 Linear and Nonlinear Waves (New York: Wiiey)
Whittaker E T and Watson G N 1902 A Course of Modern Analysis (CamGidge: Cambridge University

     Press)
Xiaoqing L and Mutao S 1982 Solar Phys. 75 83,98
Zeldovich Ya B and Raizer Yu P 1966 Physics of Shock Waves and High Temperature Phenomena (New

     York: Academic)
