

=== PAGE 1 ===
arXiv:astro-ph/0701517v1  18 Jan 2007
Strong, Moskalenko, and Ptuskin
1
Cosmic-ray propagation and interactions in
the Galaxy
Andrew
W.
Strong1,
Igor
V.
Moskalenko2,
Vladimir
S.
Ptuskin3
1. Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur extraterrestrische Physik, Postfach 1312, 85741
Garching, Germany. aws@mpe.mpg.de
2. Hansen Experimental Physics Laboratory (HEPL) and KIPAC, Stanford
University, Stanford, CA 94305, U.S.A. imos@stanford.edu
3. Institute for Terrestrial Magnetism, Ionosphere and Radiowave Propagation
of the Russian Academy of Sciences (IZMIRAN), Troitsk, Moscow region
142190, Russia. vptuskin@izmiran.ru
Key Words
energetic particles, gamma rays, interstellar medium, magnetic
ﬁelds, plasmas This draft was made on February 5, 2008.
Abstract
We survey the theory and experimental tests for the propagation of cosmic rays in the Galaxy
up to energies of 1015 eV. A guide to the previous reviews and essential literature is given,
followed by an exposition of basic principles. The basic ideas of cosmic-ray propagation are
described, and the physical origin of its processes are explained. The various techniques for
computing the observational consequences of the theory are described and contrasted. These
include analytical and numerical techniques. We present the comparison of models with data
including direct and indirect – especially gamma-ray – observations, and indicate what we can
learn about cosmic-ray propagation. Some particular important topics including electrons and
antiparticles are chosen for discussion.
CONTENTS
Introduction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
Cosmic-ray Propagation: Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
Basics and Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
Propagation equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
Diﬀusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
Convection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
Reacceleration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
Galactic structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
Interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
Weighted Slabs and Leaky Boxes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
Explicit models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
GALPROP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
Numerical versus analytical . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
Self-consistent models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13


=== PAGE 2 ===
Confrontation of Theory with Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
Stable secondary/primary ratios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
Unstable secondary/primary ratios: ‘radioactive clocks’ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
K-capture isotopes and acceleration delay
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
K-capture isotopes and reacceleration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
Anisotropy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
Diﬀuse Galactic Gamma Rays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
Antiprotons and positrons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
Electrons and Synchrotron Radiation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
Time- and space-dependent eﬀects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
Summary Points list . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
Future Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
Related Resources
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
Key terms, deﬁnitions and acronyms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
1
Introduction
Cosmic rays (hereafter CR) are almost unique in astrophysics in that they can
be directly sampled, not just observed via electromagnetic radiation. Other ex-
amples are meteorites and stardust. CR provide us with a detailed elemental
and isotopic sample of the current (few million years old) interstellar medium
not available in any other way. It is this which makes the subject especially rich
and complementary to other disciplines.
CR have featured frequently in Annual Reviews: about 15 articles from 1952
to 1989! Reviews include heavy nuclei (1), collective transport eﬀects (2), com-
position (3) and propagation (4). Cox’s recent Annual Review ‘The Three Phase
Interstellar Medium’ (5) contains much discussion of CR as one essential com-
ponent of the interstellar medium (ISM), but inevitably no mention of their
propagation. Two recent AnnRev articles (6; 7) give extensive discussion of the
relation of CR to turbulence which means we do not try to cover this also.
A basic reference is the book ‘Astrophysics of Cosmic Rays’ (8) which expounds
all the essential concepts, and is an update of the classic ‘The Origin of Cosmic
Rays’ (9) which laid the modern foundations of the subject, with an updated
presentation in (10).
Good books for basic expositions are (11; 12) and for
high energies (13).
A basic text emphasizing theory is (14), while the book
‘Astrophysics of Galactic Cosmic Rays’ (15) gives an valuable overview of the
experimental data and theoretical ideas as of 2001. The bi-annual International
Cosmic Ray Conference proceedings1 are also an essential source of information,
especially for the latest news on the subject.
Recently a plethora of reviews have appeared on the subject of CR above 1015
eV, e.g. (16; 17; 18); on interactions (19), on experiments and astrophysics (20),
more on astrophysics, propagation and composition (21; 22; 23), and a review
of models (24); we recommend (25) and the very up to date (26; 27). Therefore
this topic has been excluded here. At the lowest energy end, we note that MeV
particles are non-thermal (even if not relativistic) and must be mentioned in a
1the recent conferences are available via the NASA Astrophysics Data System ADS
2


=== PAGE 3 ===
Strong, Moskalenko, and Ptuskin
3
review of CR, especially since they are important sources of heating and ionization
of the interstellar medium (28). As one example of their far-ranging inﬂuence,
star formation in molecular clouds may be suppressed by CR produced in SNR
nearby (29).
It is worth distinguishing between two ways of approaching CR propagation:
either from the particle point-of-view, including the spectrum and interactions,
or treating the CR as a weightless collisionless relativistic gas with pressure and
energy and considering it alongside other components of the interstellar medium
(30; 31). Both ways of looking at the problem are valid up to a point, but for
consistency a uniﬁed approach would be desirable and to our knowledge has never
been attempted. The nearest approach to this is (32; 33). Most papers address
exclusively one or the other aspect. The ﬁrst approach is required for comparison
with observations of CR (direct and indirect) while the second is required for the
ISM: stability, heating etc. (5).
The major recent advances in the ﬁeld are the high quality measurements
of isotopic composition and element spectra, and observations by gamma-ray
telescopes, both satellite and ground-based. Space does not allow any discussion
of the observational data here, but the ﬁgures give an illustrative overview of what
is now available from both direct (Figs. 1–13) and indirect (γ-ray) measurements
(Figs. 14, 16). Concerning the origin of CR, we follow Cesarsky’s 1980 Annual
Review (4) ‘we will, for the most part, sidestep this problem.’ Hence we omit CR
sources including composition and acceleration; for supernova remnants as CR
sources the literature can be traced back from the most recent H.E.S.S. TeV γ-ray
results (34). We also omit solar modulation, galaxy clusters and extragalactic
CR. We mostly restrict attention to our own Galaxy, but mention important
information coming from external galaxies (via synchrotron radiation).
We ﬁrst introduce the theoretical background, and then consider the confronta-
tion of theory with observation. A number of particular topics are selected for
further discussion.
2
Cosmic-ray Propagation: Theory
2.1
Basics and Approaches
We present the basic concepts of CR propagation, and techniques for relat-
ing these to observational data.
Practically all our knowledge of CR propa-
gation comes via secondary CR, with additional information from γ-rays and
synchrotron radiation. It is useful at the outset to point out why secondary nu-
clei in particular are a good probe of CR propagation: the fact that the primary
nuclei are measured (at least locally) means that the secondary production func-
tions can be computed from primary spectra, cross-sections and interstellar gas
densities with reasonable precision; the secondaries can then be ‘propagated’ and
compared with observations.
Since the realization that CR ﬁll the Galaxy it has been clear that nuclear
interactions imply that their composition contains information on their propaga-
tion (44). A historical event was the arrival of satellite measurements of isotopic
Li, Be, B in the 1970’s (45). Since then the subject has expanded enormously
with models of increasing degrees of sophistication. The simple observation that
the observed composition of CR is diﬀerent from that of solar, in that rare solar-
system nuclei like Boron are abundant in CR, proves the importance of propaga-


=== PAGE 4 ===
4
Cosmic-ray propagation
tion in the interstellar medium. The canonical ‘few g cm−2’ of traversed material
is one of the widest-known facts of cosmic-ray physics.
At present we believe that the diﬀusion model with possible inclusion of con-
vection provides the most adequate description of CR transport in the Galaxy at
energies below about 1017 eV so we begin by presenting this model.
2.2
Propagation equation
The CR propagation equation for a particular particle species can be written in
the general form:
∂ψ(⃗r, p, t)
∂t
=
q(⃗r, p, t) +⃗∇· (Dxx⃗∇ψ −⃗V ψ)
+
∂
∂p p2Dpp
∂
∂p
1
p2 ψ −∂
∂p

˙pψ −p
3 (⃗∇·⃗V )ψ

−1
τf
ψ −1
τr
ψ (1)
where ψ(⃗r, p, t) is the CR density per unit of total particle momentum p at posi-
tion⃗r, ψ(p)dp = 4πp2f(⃗p)dp in terms of phase-space density f(⃗p), q(⃗r, p) is the
source term including primary, spallation and decay contributions, Dxx is the
spatial diﬀusion coeﬃcient,⃗V is the convection velocity, diﬀusive reacceleration
is described as diﬀusion in momentum space and is determined by the coeﬃcient
Dpp , ˙p ≡dp/dt is the momentum gain or loss rate, τf is the time scale for loss
by fragmentation, and τr is the time scale for radioactive decay.
CR sources are usually assumed to be concentrated near the Galactic disk
and to have a radial distribution like for example supernova remnants (SNR). A
source injection spectrum and its isotopic composition are required; composition
is usually initially based on primordial solar but can be determined iteratively
from the CR data themselves for later comparison with solar. The spallation part
of q(⃗r, p, t) depends on all progenitor species and their energy-dependent cross-
sections, and the gas density n(⃗r); it is generally assumed that the spallation
products have the same kinetic energy per nucleon as the progenitor. K-electron
capture and electron stripping can be included via τf and q. Dxx is in general a
function of (⃗r, β, p/Z) where β = v/c and Z is the charge, and p/Z determines the
gyroradius in a given magnetic ﬁeld; Dxx may be isotropic, or more realistically
anisotropic, and may be inﬂuenced by the CR themselves (e.g. in wave-damping
models). Dpp is related to Dxx by DppDxx ∝p2, with the proportionality con-
stant depending on the theory of stochastic reacceleration (8; 46) as described
in Section 2.5.⃗V is a function of⃗r and depends on the nature of the Galactic
wind. The term in⃗∇·⃗V represents adiabatic momentum gain or loss in the
non-uniform ﬂow of gas with a frozen-in magnetic ﬁeld whose inhomogeneities
scatter the CR. τf depends on the total spallation cross-section and n(⃗r). n(⃗r)
can be based on surveys of atomic and molecular gas, but can also incorporate
small-scale variations such as the region of low gas density surrounding the Sun.
The presence of interstellar helium at about 10% of hydrogen by number must
be included; heavier components of the ISM are not important for producing CR
by spallation. This equation only treats continous momentum-loss; catastrophic
losses can be included via τf and q. CR electrons, positrons and antiprotons
propagation constitute just special cases of this equation, diﬀering only in their
energy losses and production rates.
The boundary conditions depend on the model; often ψ = 0 is assumed at the
‘halo boundary’ where particles escape into intergalactic space, but this obviously


=== PAGE 5 ===
Strong, Moskalenko, and Ptuskin
5
just an approximation (since the intergalactic ﬂux is not zero) which can be
relaxed for models with a physical treatment of the boundary.
Equation (1) is a time-dependent equation; usually the steady-state solution
is required, which can be obtained either by setting ∂ψ/∂t = 0 or following the
time dependence until a steady state is reached; the latter procedure is much
easier to implement numerically. The time-dependence of q is neglected unless
eﬀects of nearby recent sources or the stochastic nature of sources are being
studied. Starting with the solution for the heaviest primaries and using this to
compute the spallation source for their products, the complete system can be
solved including secondaries, tertiaries etc. Then the CR spectra at the solar
position can be compared with direct observations, including solar modulation if
required.
Source abundances are determined iteratively, comparing propagation calcula-
tions with data; for nuclei with very small source abundances, the source values
are masked by secondaries and cross-section uncertainties and are therefore hard
to determine. Webber (47) gives a ranking from ‘easy’ to ‘impossible’ for the
possibility of getting the source abundances using ACE data. A recent review of
the high-precision abundances from ACE is in (48) and for Ulysses in (49). For a
useful summary of the various astrophysical abundances relevant to interpreting
CR abundances see (50).
2.3
Diﬀusion
The concept of CR diﬀusion explains why energetic charged particles have highly
isotropic distributions and why they are retained well in the Galaxy. The Galactic
magnetic ﬁeld which tangles the trajectories of particles plays a crucial role in
this process. Typical values of the diﬀusion coeﬃcient found from ﬁtting to CR
data is Dxx ∼(3 −5) × 1028 cm2 s−1 at energy ∼1 GeV/n and it increases with
magnetic rigidity as R0.3 −R0.6 in diﬀerent versions of the empirical diﬀusion
model of CR propagation.
On the “microscopic level” the diﬀusion of CR results from particle scattering
on random MHD waves and discontinuities.
The eﬀective “collision integral”
for charged energetic particles moving in a magnetic ﬁeld with small random
ﬂuctuations δB ≪B can be taken from the standard quasi-linear theory of
plasma turbulence (51). The wave-particle interaction is of resonant character
so that an energetic particle is predominantly scattered by those irregularities
of magnetic ﬁeld which have their projection of the wave vector on the average
magnetic ﬁeld direction equal to k∥= ±s/ (rgµ), where µ is the particle pitch
angle. The integers s = 0, 1, 2... correspond to cyclotron resonances of diﬀerent
orders.
The eﬃciency of scattering depends on the polarization of the waves
and on their distribution in k-space.
The ﬁrst-order resonance s = 1 is the
most important for the isotropic and also for the one-dimensional distribution
of random MHD waves along the average magnetic ﬁeld. In some cases – for
calculation of scattering at small µ and for calculation of perpendicular diﬀusion
– the broadening of resonances and magnetic mirroring eﬀects should be taken
into account. The resulting spatial diﬀusion is strongly anisotropic locally and
goes predominantly along the magnetic ﬁeld lines. However, strong ﬂuctuations of
magnetic ﬁeld on large scales L ∼100 pc, where the strength of the random ﬁeld
is several times higher than the average ﬁeld strength, lead to the isotropization
of global CR diﬀusion in the Galaxy. The rigorous treatment of this eﬀect is not


=== PAGE 6 ===
6
Cosmic-ray propagation
trivial, since the ﬁeld is almost static and the strictly one-dimensional diﬀusion
along the magnetic ﬁeld lines does not lead to non-zero diﬀusion perpendicular
to B, see (52) and the references cited there.
Following several detailed reviews of the theory of CR diﬀusion (53; 54; 8;
14) the diﬀusion coeﬃcient at rg < L can be roughly estimated as Dxx ≈
(δBres/B)−2 vrg/3, where δBres is the amplitude of random ﬁeld at the resonant
wave number kres = 1/rg. The spectral energy density of interstellar turbulence
has a power law form w(k)dk ∼k−2+adk, a = 1/3 over a wide range of wave
numbers 1/(1020 cm) < k < 1/(108 cm), see (6), and the strength of the random
ﬁeld at the main scale is δB ≈5 µG. This gives an estimate of the diﬀusion coef-
ﬁcient Dxx ≈2 × 1027βR1/3
GV cm2 s−1 for all CR particles with magnetic rigidities
R < 108 GV, in a fair agreement with the empirical diﬀusion model (the version
with distributed reacceleration). The scaling law Dxx ∼R1/3 is determined by
the value of the exponent a = 1/3, typical for a Kolmogorov spectrum. The-
oretically (55) the Kolmogorov type spectrum might refer only to some part of
the MHD turbulence which includes the (Alfvenic) structures strongly elongated
along the magnetic-ﬁeld direction and which are not able to provide the signiﬁcant
scattering and required diﬀusion of cosmic rays. In parallel, the more isotropic
(fast magnetosonic) part of the turbulence, with a smaller value of random ﬁeld
at the main scale and with the exponent a = 1/2 typical for the Kraichnan type
turbulence spectrum, may exist in the interstellar medium (56). The Kraichnan
spectrum gives a scaling Dxx ∼R1/2 which is close to the high-energy asymptotic
form of the diﬀusion coeﬃcient obtained in the ‘plain diﬀusion’ version of the em-
pirical propagation model. Thus the approach based on kinetic theory gives a
proper estimate of the diﬀusion coeﬃcient and predicts a power-law dependence
of diﬀusion on magnetic rigidity, but the determination of the actual diﬀusion
coeﬃcient has to be done with the help of empirical models of CR propagation
in the Galaxy.
2.4
Convection
While the most frequently considered mode of CR transport is diﬀusion, the ex-
istence of galactic winds in many galaxies suggests that convective (or advective)
transport could be important. Winds are common in galaxies and can be CR
driven (57). CR play a dynamical role in galactic halos (58; 59). Convection
not only transports CR, it can also produce adiabatic energy losses as the wind
speed increases away from the disk.
Convection was ﬁrst considered by (60)
and followed up by (61; 62; 63; 64; 65). Both 1-zone and 2-zone models have
been studied: a 1-zone model has convection and diﬀusion everywhere, a 2-zone
model has diﬀusion alone up to some distance from the plane, and diﬀusion plus
convection beyond.
A recent AnnRev on galactic winds (66) does not mention CR, surprisingly.
In the same volume, Cox’s article on the Three Phase Interstellar Medium (5)
includes CR as a basic component. Direct evidence for winds in our own Galaxy
seems to be conﬁned to the Galactic centre region from X-ray images. However
Cox (5) is not sure there is a wind: ‘A Galactic wind may be occurring, but I
do not believe that it carries oﬀa signiﬁcant fraction of the supernova power
from the Solar Neighborhood because it would carry oﬀa similar power in the
pervading cosmic rays...’
For one-zone diﬀusion/convection models a good diagnostic is the energy-


=== PAGE 7 ===
Strong, Moskalenko, and Ptuskin
7
dependence of the secondary-to-primary ratio:
a purely convective transport
would have no energy dependence (apart from the velocity-dependence of the
reaction rate), contrary to what is observed.
If the diﬀusion rate decreases
with decreasing energy, any convection will eventually take over and cause the
secondary-to-primary ratio to ﬂatten at low energy: this is observed but con-
vection ( proposed (64) to explain just this eﬀect) does not reproduce e.g. B/C
very well (67). Another test is provided by radioactive isotopes which eﬀectively
constrain the wind speed to <10 km s−1 kpc−1 for a speed increasing linearly
with distance from the disk (67). A value of ≈15 km s−1 (constant speed wind)
is required to ﬁt B/C even in the presence of reacceleration according to (68)
which can be compared to 30 km s−1 in the wind model of (69); the latter value
implies an energy dependence of the diﬀusion coeﬃcient which may conﬂict with
CR anisotropy.
(33) studied a self-consistent two-zone model with a wind driven by CR and
thermal gas in a rotating Galaxy. The CR propagation is entirely diﬀusive in a
zone |z| < 1 kpc, and diﬀusive-convective outside. CR reaching the convective
zone do not return, so it acts as a halo boundary with height varying with energy
and Galactocentric radius. It is possible to explain the energy-dependence of the
secondary-to-primary ratio with this model, and it is also claimed to be consistent
with radioactive isotopes. The eﬀect of a Galactic wind on the radial CR gradient
has been investigated (70); they constructed a self-consistent model with the wind
driven by CR, and with anisotropic diﬀusion. The convective velocities involved
in the outer zone are large (100 km s−1) but this model is still consistent with
radioactive CR nuclei which set a much lower limit (67), since this limit is only
applicable in the inner zone. Observational support of such models would require
direct evidence for a Galactic wind in the halo.
2.5
Reacceleration
In addition to spatial diﬀusion, the scattering of CR particles on randomly moving
MHD waves leads to stochastic acceleration which is described in the transport
equation as diﬀusion in momentum space with some diﬀusion coeﬃcient Dpp. One
can estimate it as Dpp = p2V 2
a / (9Dxx) where the Alfv´en velocity Va is introduced
as a characteristic velocity of weak disturbances propagating in a magnetic ﬁeld,
see (8; 14) for rigorous formulas.
Distributed acceleration in the entire Galactic volume cannot serve as the main
mechanism of acceleration of CR at least in the energy range 1 −100 GeV/n.
In this case the particles of higher energy would spend longer in the system,
which would result in an increase of the relative abundance of secondary nuclei
as energy increases, contrary to observation. This argument does not hold at
low energies where distributed acceleration may be strong and it may explain the
existence of peaks in the ratios of secondary to primary nuclei at about 1 GeV/n
if the distributed acceleration becomes signiﬁcant at this energy. The process
of distributed acceleration in the interstellar medium is also referred to as ‘reac-
celeration’ to distinguish it from the primary acceleration process which occurs
in the CR sources. It has been shown (71; 46) that the observed dependence
of abundance of secondary nuclei on energy can be explained in the model with
reacceleration if the CR diﬀusion coeﬃcient varies as a single power law of rigidity
Dxx ∼Ra with an exponent a ∼0.3 over the whole energy range (corresponding
to particle scattering on MHD turbulence with a Kolmogorov spectrum), and if


=== PAGE 8 ===
8
Cosmic-ray propagation
the Alfv´en velocity is Va ∼30 km s−1, which is close to its actual value in the
interstellar medium.
In addition to stable secondary nuclei, the secondary K-capture isotopes are
useful for the study of possible reacceleration in the interstellar medium (72).
The isotopes 37Ar, 44Ti, 49V, 51Cr and some others decay rapidly by electron
capture at low energies where energetic ions can have an orbital electron. The
probability to have an orbital electron depends strongly on energy and because
of this the abundance of these isotopes and of their decay products are strong
functions of energy and sensitive to changes of particle energy in the interstellar
medium. The ﬁrst measurements of an energy-dependent decay of 49V and 51Cr
in CR (73) were used to test the rate of distributed interstellar reacceleration (74)
but reﬁnement of nuclear production cross sections is required to draw deﬁnite
conclusions.
The gain of particle energy in the process of reacceleration is accompanied by
a corresponding energy loss of the interstellar MHD turbulence. According to
calculations (75) the dissipation on CR may signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the Kraichnan
nonlinear cascade of waves at less 1013 cm and even terminate the cascade at
small scales. This results in a self-consistent change of the rigidity dependence
of diﬀusion coeﬃcient with a steep rise of Dxx to small rigidities. The scheme
explains the high-energy scaling of diﬀusion Dxx ∼R0.5 and oﬀers an explanation
of the observed energy dependence of primary to secondary ratios.
As mentioned above, the data on secondary nuclei provide evidence against
strong reacceleration in the entire Galaxy at 1−100 GeV/n. However, the spectra
of secondaries can be considerably modiﬁed due to processes in the source regions,
with a small total Galactic volume ﬁlling factor, for the regions where the high-
velocity SNR shocks accelerate primary CR. Two eﬀects could be operating there
and both lead to the production of a component of secondaries with ﬂat energy
spectra (76; 77).
One eﬀect is the production of secondaries in SNR by the
spallation of primary nuclei which have a ﬂat source energy spectrum close to E−2.
Another eﬀect is the direct acceleration by strong SNR shocks of background
secondary nuclei residing in the interstellar medium; again the secondaries acquire
the ﬂat source energy spectrum.
Calculations (77) showed that these eﬀects
might produce a ﬂat component of secondary nuclei rising above the standard
steep spectrum of secondaries at energies above about 100 GeV/n.
2.6
Galactic structure
Almost all aspects of Galactic structure aﬀect CR propagation, but the most
important are the gas content for secondary production and the interstellar ra-
diation ﬁeld and magnetic ﬁeld for electron energy losses. The magnetic ﬁeld
is clearly also important for diﬀusion but the precise absolute magnitude and
large-scale structure are less important (at least for CR below 1015 eV) than the
turbulence properties.
The distribution of atomic hydrogen is reasonably well known from 21-cm
surveys, but the molecular hydrogen is less well known since it has to use the CO
molecular tracer and the conversion factor is hard to determine and may depend
on position in the Galaxy. In fact CR–gas interactions provide one of the best
methods to determine the molecular hydrogen content of the Galaxy, because
of its basic simplicity, as we describe in the chapter on gamma rays. For more
details we refer to another review (78).


=== PAGE 9 ===
Strong, Moskalenko, and Ptuskin
9
The Galactic magnetic ﬁeld can be determined from pulsar rotation and dis-
persion measures combined with a model for the distribution of ionized gas. A
large-scale ﬁeld of a few µG aligned with spiral arms exists, but there is no
general agreement on the details (79). One recent analysis gives a bisymmetric
model for the large-scale Galactic magnetic ﬁeld with reversals on arm-interarm
boundaries (80). Independent estimates of the strength and distribution of the
ﬁeld can be made by simultaneous analysis of radio synchrotron, CR and γ-ray
data, and these conﬁrm a value of a few µG, increasing towards the inner Galaxy
(81). A lot of eﬀort has gone into constructing magnetic ﬁeld models to study
propagation at energies >1015 eV where the Larmor radius is large enough for the
global topology to be important; this is relevant to CR anisotropy and the search
for point sources. Since this is excluded from our review we refer the reader to
(82; 83; 84).
The interstellar radiation ﬁeld (ISRF) comes from stars of all types and is
processed by absorption and re-emission by interstellar dust; it extends from the
far-infrared though optical to the UV. Computing the ISRF is diﬃcult, but a
great deal of new information on the stellar content of the Galaxy and dust is
now available to make better models for use in propagation codes (85).
The local environment around the Sun (86) is also important, for example the
local bubble can have an eﬀect on radioactive nuclei as described in Sec 3.2.
Extensive coverage of the local environment including CR is in (87).
2.7
Interactions
This large subject is well covered in the literature. Details of the essential pro-
cesses with references have been conveniently collected in our series of papers:
energy losses of nuclei and electrons (67), bremsstrahlung and synchrotron emis-
sion (81), inverse-Compton emission including anisotropic scattering (88), pion
production of γ-rays, electrons and positrons (39). Pion production has recently
been studied in great detail using modern particle-physics codes (89; 90), the for-
mer giving spectra harder by 0.05 in the index and γ-ray yields somewhat higher
at a few GeV than older treatments. New more accurate parameterizations will
be important for the new generation of CR and γ-ray experiments.
A useful
guide to spallation cross-section measurements and models is the contribution by
J. Connell in (91), and a summary of recent advances is in (92; 93; 94). Accounts
of radioactive and K-capture processes are in (95; 96; 97; 73; 98).
2.8
Weighted Slabs and Leaky Boxes
As mentioned at the start of this section, at present we believe that the diﬀusion
model with possible inclusion of convection provides the most adequate descrip-
tion of CR transport in the Galaxy at energies below about 1017 eV. The closely
related leaky-box and weighted slab formalisms have provided the basis for most
of the literature interpreting CR data.
In the leaky-box model, the diﬀusion and convection terms are approximated
by the leakage term with some characteristic escape time of CR from the Galaxy.
The escape time τesc may be a function of particle energy (momentum), charge,
and mass number if needed, but it does not depend on the spatial coordinates.
There are two cases when the leaky box equations can be obtained as a correct
approximation to the diﬀusion model: 1) the model with fast CR diﬀusion in the


=== PAGE 10 ===
10
Cosmic-ray propagation
Galaxy and particle reﬂection at the CR halo boundaries with some probability
to escape (9), 2) the formulae for CR density in the Galactic disk in the ﬂat halo
model (zh ≪R) with thin source and gas disks (zgas ≪zh) which are formally
equivalent to the leaky-box model formulae in the case when stable nuclei are
considered (10). The nuclear fragmentation is actually determined not by the
escape time τesc but rather by the escape length in g cm−2: x = vρτesc , where ρ
is the average gas density of interstellar gas in a galaxy with the volume of the
cosmic ray halo included.
The solution of a system of coupled transport equations for all isotopes involved
in the process of nuclear fragmentation is required for studying CR propaga-
tion. A powerful method, the weighted-slab technique, which consists of splitting
the problem into astrophysical and nuclear parts was suggested for this problem
(99; 9) before the modern computer epoch. The nuclear fragmentation prob-
lem is solved in terms of the slab model wherein the CR beam is allowed to
traverse a thickness x of the interstellar gas and these solutions are integrated
over all values of x weighted with a distribution function G(x) derived from
an astrophysical propagation model. In its standard realization (100; 101) the
weighted-slab method breaks down for low energy CR where one has strong en-
ergy dependence of nuclear cross sections, strong energy losses, and energy de-
pendent diﬀusion. Furthermore, if the diﬀusion coeﬃcient depends on the nuclear
species the method has rather signiﬁcant errors. After some modiﬁcation (102)
the weighted-slab method becomes rigorous for the important special case of sep-
arable dependence of the diﬀusion coeﬃcient on particle energy (or rigidity) and
position with no convective transport. The modiﬁed weighted-slab method was
applied to a few simple diﬀusion models in (69; 74). The weighted-slab method
can also be applied to the solution of the leaky-box equations. It can easily be
shown that the leaky-box model has an exponential distribution of path lengths
G(x) ∝exp(−x/X) with the mean grammage equal to the escape length X.
In a purely empirical approach, one can try to determine the shape of the
distribution function G(x) which best ﬁts the data on abundances of stable pri-
mary and secondary nuclei (1). It has been established that the shape of G(x)
is close to exponential: G(x) ∝exp(−x/X(R, β)), and this justiﬁes the use of
the leaky-box model in this case. There are several recent calculations of G(x)
(103; 104; 69; 74).
The possible existence of truncation, a deﬁcit at small path lengths (below a
few g cm−2 at energies near 1 GeV/n), relative to an exponential path-length
distribution, has been discussed for decades (1; 101; 105; 106). The problem was
not solved mainly because of cross-sectional uncertainties. In a consistent theory
of CR diﬀusion and nuclear fragmentation in the cloudy interstellar medium, the
truncation occurs naturally if some fraction of CR sources resides inside dense
giant molecular clouds (107).
For radioactive nuclei, the classical approach is to compute the ‘surviving frac-
tion’ which is the ratio of the observed abundance to that expected in the case
of no decay. Often the result is given in the form of an eﬀective mean gas den-
sity, to be compared with the average density in the Galaxy, but this density
should not be taken at face value. The surviving fraction can better be related
to physical parameters (108). None of these methods can face the complexities of
propagation of CR electrons and positrons with their large energy and spatially
dependent energy losses.


=== PAGE 11 ===
Strong, Moskalenko, and Ptuskin
11
2.9
Explicit models
Finally the mathematical eﬀort required to put the 3-D Galaxy into a 1-D for-
malism becomes overwhelming, and it seems better to work in physical space
from the beginning: this approach is intuitively simple and easy to interpret.
We can call these ‘explicit solutions.’ The explicit solution approach including
secondaries was pioneered by (10) and applied to newer data by (109; 65) with
analytical solutions for 2D diﬀusion-convection models with a cosmic-ray source
distribution, which however had many restrictive approximations to make them
tractable (no energy losses, simple gas model). More recently a semi-empirical
model which is 2D and includes energy-losses and reacceleration has been devel-
oped (110; 68). This is a closed-form solution expressed as a Green’s function to
be integrated over the sources. It incorporates a radial CR source distribution,
but the gas model is a simple constant density within the disk. (111) give an an-
alytical solution for the time-dependent case with a generalized gas distribution
but now without energy losses. (This shows again the problem of handling both
gas and energy losses simultaneously in analytical schemes).
A ‘myriad sources model’ (112), which is actually a Green’s function method
without energy losses, yields similar results to (113) for the diﬀusion coeﬃcient
and halo size. But applying the no-energy loss case to ACE data is not really
justiﬁed, and some defects in their formulation have been pointed out (111). A
3D analytical propagation method has been developed (114; 115) with energy
loss and reacceleration, going via a PLD, but it cannot handle ionization losses
properly, see section 2.2 of (115). They have no spatial boundaries at all and
rather simpliﬁed (exponential) forms for the gas and other distributions.
An
approach adapted to ﬁne-scale spatial and temporal variations has been described
(116). This uses a Green’s function without energy losses or detailed gas model
and hence is limited in its application, but is useful for studying the eﬀect of
discrete sources.
The most advanced explicit solution to date is the fully numerical model de-
scribed in the next section. Even this has limitations in treating some aspects
(e.g. when particle trajectories become important at high energies) so one might
ask whether a fully Monte-Carlo approach (as is commonly done for energies
> 1015 eV) would not be better in the future, given increasing computing power.
This would allow eﬀects like ﬁeld-line diﬀusion (important for propagation per-
pendicular to the Galactic plane) to be explicitly included. However it is still
challenging: a GeV particle diﬀusing with a mean free path of 1 pc in a Galaxy
with 4 kpc halo height takes ∼(4000/1)2 ≈107 scatterings to leave the Galaxy,
which would even now need supercomputers to obtain adequate statistics. Hence
we expect numerical solution of the propagation equations to remain an impor-
tant approach for the foreseeable future.
2.10
GALPROP
The GALPROP code (67) was created with the following aims: 1. to enable si-
multaneous predictions of all relevant observations including CR nuclei, electrons
and positrons, γ-rays and synchrotron radiation, 2. to overcome the limitations of
analytical and semi-analytical methods, taking advantage of advances in comput-
ing power, as CR, γ-ray and other data become more accurate, 3. to incorporate
current information on Galactic structure and source distributions, 4. to pro-


=== PAGE 12 ===
12
Cosmic-ray propagation
vide a publicly-available code as a basis for further expansion. The ﬁrst point is
the most important, the idea being that all data relate to the same system, the
Galaxy, and one cannot for example allow a model which ﬁts secondary/primary
ratios while not ﬁtting γ-rays or not being compatible with the known interstel-
lar gas distribution. There are many simultaneous constraints, and to ﬁnd one
model satisfying all of them is a challenge, which in fact has not been met up to
now. Upcoming missions should beneﬁt2.
We give a very brief summary of GALPROP; for details we refer the reader
to the relevant papers (67; 39; 81; 117; 113; 75) and a dedicated website3. The
propagation equation (1) is solved numerically on a spatial grid, either in 2D with
cylindrical symmetry in the Galaxy or in full 3D. The boundaries of the model in
radius and height, and the grid spacing, are user-deﬁnable. In addition there is a
grid in momentum; momentum (not e.g. kinetic energy) is used because it is the
natural quantity for propagation in equation (1). Parameters for all processes
in equation (1) can be controlled on input. The distribution of CR sources can
be freely chosen, typically to represent SNR. Source spectral shape and isotopic
composition (relative to protons) are input parameters. Interstellar gas distri-
butions are based on current HI and CO surveys, and the interstellar radiation
ﬁeld is based on a detailed calculation. Cross-sections are based on extensive
compilations and parameterizations (92).
The numerical solution proceeds in
time until a steady-state is reached; a time-dependent solution is also an option.
Starting with the heaviest primary nucleus considered (e.g. 64Ni) the propagation
solution is used to compute the source term for its spallation products, which are
then propagated in turn, and so on down to protons, secondary electrons and
positrons, and antiprotons. In this way secondaries, tertiaries etc. are included.
(Production of 10B via the 10Be-decay channel is important and requires a second
iteration of this procedure.) GALPROP includes K-capture and electron strip-
ping processes, where a nucleus with an electron (H-like) is considered a separate
species because of the diﬀerence in the lifetime. Since H-like atoms have only
one K-shell electron, the K-capture decay half-life has to be increased by a fac-
tor of 2 compared to the measured half-life value. Primary electrons are treated
separately. Normalization of protons, helium and electrons to experimental data
is provided (all other isotopes are determined by the source composition and
propagation). γ-rays and synchrotron are computed using interstellar gas data
(for pion-decay and bremsstrahlung) and the ISRF model (for inverse Compton).
Spectra of all species on the chosen grid and the γ-ray and synchrotron skymaps
are output in a standard astronomical format for comparison with data.
Re-
cent extensions to GALPROP include non-linear wave damping (75) and a dark
matter package.
The computing resources required by GALPROP are moderate by today’s
standards. We remark that while GALPROP has the ambitious goal of being
‘realistic’, it is obvious that any such model can only be a crude approximation
to reality. Some known limitations are: only energies below 1015 eV (no trajectory
calculations), uniform source abundances (no superbubble enhancements), only
scales >10 pc (no clumpy ISM: limited by computer power), B-ﬁeld treated as
random for synchrotron (regular component aﬀects structure of radio emission).
2GALPROP has been adopted as the standard for diﬀuse Galactic γ-ray emission for NASA’s
GLAST γ-ray observatory, and is also made use of by the AMS, ACE, HEAT and Pamela
collaborations.
3http://galprop.stanford.edu


=== PAGE 13 ===
Strong, Moskalenko, and Ptuskin
13
For these cases other techniques may be more appropriate, and they provide a
goal for future developments of GALPROP.
2.11
Numerical versus analytical
The following expresses the authors’ opinion on this matter.
The analytical
approaches are claimed to have various advantages as follows:
1. Physical insight: of course it is true that analytical solutions for simple
cases are very useful to get insight into the relations between the quantities
involved, and for rough estimates. In fact the analytical formulae may become so
complicated that ﬁnally no insight is gained. In contrast the numerical models are
very intuitive since they generate explicitly the CR distribution over the Galaxy
for all species. 2. Equivalent to full solution of propagation equation: only
true under restrictive conditions, especially involving energy-losses and spatially
varying densities. Electrons and positrons are anyway beyond analytical methods
(for energy-losses on realistic interstellar radiation ﬁelds), while these are an
essential component of the CR. 3. Faster, easier to compute: with todays
computers the speed issue has become irrelevant, and the implementation of a
numerical model is not harder than the complicated integrals over Bessel functions
etc.
In summary we can do no better than a quotation from a paper of 26 years ago
(!) (118): ‘It is unclear whether one would wish to go much beyond the general-
izations discussed above for an analytically soluble diﬀusion model. The added
insight from any analytic solution over a purely numerical approach is quickly
cancelled by the growing complexity of the formulae. With rapidly developing
computational capabilities, one could proﬁtably employ numerical solutions...’
We remark also that for CR air-shower calculations, analytical methods gave
way to numerical ones at least 40 years ago.
2.12
Self-consistent models
A few attempts at a self-consistent description of CR in the Galaxy have been
made, including them as a relativistic gas as one component of ISM dynamics.
This is obviously much harder than the phenomenological models described above
which treat propagation in a prescribed environment. 3D models of the magne-
tized ISM with a CR-driven wind have been made by (32; 33) and this is claimed
to be also consistent with CR secondary/primary ratios. Such a wind has been
put forward as a possible explanation of the CR gradient problem (70). The
Parker instability has been re-analysed recently (119) using anisotropic diﬀusion
(120) and followed by a CR-driven Galactic dynamo model (121) which uses an
extension the Zeus-3D MHD code (30) including CR propagation and sources.
CR propagation in a magnetic ﬁeld produced by dynamo action of a turbulent
ﬂow (31) presents the whole subject from a novel viewpoint. The extension of
such approaches to include CR spectra, secondaries, γ-rays etc., which would
provide a complete set of comparisons with observations, would be very desirable
but has not yet been attempted. Another kind of self-consistency is to include
the eﬀect of CR on the diﬀusion coeﬃcient (75) as described in more detail in
Section 2.5.


=== PAGE 14 ===
14
Cosmic-ray propagation
3
Confrontation of Theory with Data
3.1
Stable secondary/primary ratios
The reference ratio is almost always B/C because B is entirely secondary, the
measurements are better than for other ratios and are available up to 100 GeV.
Because C,N,O are the major progenitors of B, the production cross sections are
better known than, e.g. in the case of Be and Li (122; 94).
The usual procedure is to use a leaky-box or weighted-slab formalism with the
empirical rigidity-dependence X(R) = (β/β0)X0, (β/β0)(R/R0)−αX0 for R <
R0, R > R0 respectively. The break at R0 is required because B/C is observed
to decrease to low energies faster than the β-dependence (which just describes
the velocity eﬀect on the reaction rate). The source composition depends on the
form and parameters of X(R), and vice-versa, (since for example B is produced
by C,N,O etc) so the procedure is iterative, starting from a solar-like composition.
A typical parameter set ﬁtting the data (69) is α = 0.54 , X0 = 11.8 g cm−2, R0
= 4.9 GV/c, with a source spectrum rigidity index –2.35. In principle all other
secondary/primary ratios should be consistent with the same parameter set. This
is generally found to be the case. As a state-of-the-art application of the weighted
slab technique of (102) we again refer to (69). This is applicable to stable nuclei
only but includes energy losses and gains subject to the limitations described
in Section 2.8. They apply the method to 1-D disk-halo diﬀusion, convection,
turbulent diﬀusion and reacceleration models cast in weighted-slab form. Fig. 8
shows B/C and (Sc+Ti+V)/Fe, so-called sub-Fe/Fe, from their paper. Clearly
the models cannot be distinguished based on these types of data alone, and they
can all provide an adequate ﬁt; this shows the importance of using other species
as well as the ones used here. The models can be used to obtain the injection
spectrum of primaries, and they ﬁnd an index of 2.3 to 2.4 for C and Fe in the
energy range 0.5 – 100 TeV, with the propagated spectrum and data shown in
Fig. 9.
It has been claimed that no break in X(R) is required to ﬁt Voyager 2 outer-
heliosphere B/C, N/O and sub-Fe/Fe data extended to 1.5 GeV, plus HEAO3
data, and adopting suitable solar modulation levels (123). Voyager 2 provides a
unique dataset because of the low solar modulation.
We consider now explicit models in the sense of Section 2.9. Basically the same
procedure is adopted, with Dxx(R) replacing X(R). Again an ad-hoc break in
Dxx(R) is required in the absence of other mechanisms. Because of the unphysical
nature of such a Dxx(R), many attempts to ﬁnd a better explanation have been
made, including convection, reacceleration/wave damping, and local sources.
Convection implies an energy-independent escape from the Galaxy so that it
dominates at low energies as the diﬀusion rate decreases, so it gives a simple low-
energy asymptotic X(R) ∝β. However this does not resemble the observed B/C
energy-dependence, being too monotonic (67). Furthermore quite severe limits
on the convection velocity come from unstable nuclei.
Reacceleration aﬀects the secondary-primary ratio as described in Section 2.5.
Many papers have shown how B/C and other ratios can be reproduced with
reacceleration at a plausible level and no ad-hoc break in the diﬀusion coeﬃcient.
An example is shown in Fig. 8. An application including recent ACE (Li, Be, B,
C) data is in (94). Since reacceleration at some level must be present if diﬀusion
occurs on moving scatterers (e.g. Alfv´en waves) this mechanism is favoured but


=== PAGE 15 ===
Strong, Moskalenko, and Ptuskin
15
it is not proven.
Direct evidence for reacceleration could come from certain
K-capture nuclei (Section 3.4).
Reacceleration requires a smaller value of α,
typically 0.3 – 0.4 , consistent with Kolmogorov turbulence, which helps solve
the problems with anisotropy (section 3.5).
Closely related to reacceleration is wave-damping as described in Section 2.5.
This can reproduce B/C, protons and antiprotons satisfactorily as shown in
Fig. 10, and also other data (75). The result of this process is a very sharp rise
of the diﬀusion coeﬃcient at rigidities less than about 1.5 GV. The Kolmogorov-
type dependence is not very successful in this scheme, while a Kraichnan-type
works better with a high rigidity asymptotic D ∼R0.5 (ﬁrst panel in Fig. 10).
A quite diﬀerent set of parameters has been proposed (68): α = 0.7 −0.9
and injection index ≈2.0, based on ﬁtting many species simultaneously, and is
suggested to produce the B/C low-energy decrease from convection. Such a large
α would give problems for the anisotropy (Section 3.5). A related analysis (110)
claims to exclude the Kolmogorov-type spectrum.
An alternative explanation for the falloﬀin B/C at low energies invokes weakly
nonlinear (in contrast to quasi-linear) transport theory of cosmic rays in turbulent
Galactic magnetic ﬁelds (124; 125).
Another, simpler, explanation of the B/C energy-dependence is the local-source
model (104; 126) in which part of the primary CR have an additional local com-
ponent. Since the secondary ﬂux has to come from the Galaxy-at-large (the local
secondaries being negligible) a steep local primary source will cause B/C to de-
crease at low energies. The known existence of the local bubble containing the
Sun, and its probable origin in a few supernovae in the last few million years,
make this a plausible possibility, but hard to prove or disprove. It is claimed
(104) that if B/C is ﬁtted in such a model, then sub-Fe/Fe is not ﬁtted, but an
acceptable ﬁt to this and other data is found in (126) using a diﬀusion model for
the large-scale component.
3.2
Unstable secondary/primary ratios: ‘radioactive clocks’
The ﬁve unstable secondary nuclei which live long enough to be useful probes
of cosmic-ray propagation are 14C, 10Be, 26Al, 36Cl and 54Mn, with properties
summarized in (101; 127; 126). 10Be is the longest-lived and best measured. The
theory is presented in section 2.2. Based on these isotopes and updated cross-
sections (128) ﬁnd zh=4–6 kpc, consistent with their earlier estimates of 3–7 kpc
(98) and 4–12 kpc (67). Fig. 11 shows a comparison of 10Be/9Be with models;
the ISOMAX 10Be measurements (129) up to 2 GeV (and hence longer decay
lifetime) are consistent with the ﬁt to the other data, although the statistics are
not very constraining.
The data are often interpreted in terms of the leaky-box model, but this is
misleading (108; 131; 127).
For the formulae and the detailed procedure for
the leaky-box model interpretation see (132). Luckily the leaky-box model sur-
viving fraction can be converted to a physically meaningful quantities (131)
for a given model; for example in a simple diﬀusive halo model, the surviv-
ing fraction determines the diﬀusion coeﬃcient, which can be combined with
stable secondary/primary ratios to derive the halo size.
Typical results are
Dxx = (3 −5) × 1028 cm2 s−1 (at 3 GV) and zh = 4 kpc. We can then compare
the leaky-box model ‘escape time’ ≈107 yr with the actual time for CR to reach
the halo boundary after leaving their sources, the latter being typically an order


=== PAGE 16 ===
16
Cosmic-ray propagation
of magnitude larger. The leaky-box model ‘gas density’ is typically 0.3 cm−3
compared to the actual average density 0.03 cm−3 for a 4 kpc halo height, again
an order-of-magnitude diﬀerence.
Since radioactive secondaries only travel a few hundred pc before decaying it is
sometimes considered (133) that they cannot give information on the propagation
region of CR; this is somewhat misleading since it is precisely the combination
of stable and radioactive data which does allow this; the radioactives determine
the diﬀusion coeﬃcient, which then allows the size of the full propagation region
to be determined from the stable secondary/primary ratio (where the CR do
come from the entire containment region). This of course assumes the diﬀusion
coeﬃcient does not vary greatly from the local region to the full volume.
The eﬀect of the local bubble surrounding the Sun on the interpretation of
radioactive nuclei was pointed out by (127). The ﬂux of unstable secondaries is
reduced if they are not produced in a gas-depleted region around the Sun, since
they will decay before reaching us, and this could lead to an overestimate of the
halo size if interpreted in a simple diﬀusive halo model. This eﬀect would be
reduced if the diﬀusion coeﬃcient in the local region were larger than the large-
scale value. In fact the situation is even more complex. According to (86; 87; 134)
the Sun left the local bubble about 105 years ago after spending several million
years inside, and we now live in the CLIC (collection of local interstellar clouds)
with HI density about 0.2 cm−3 and 35 pc extent. This aspect of the problem
for CR propagation has not yet been addressed.
3.3
K-capture isotopes and acceleration delay
Three isotopes produced in explosive nucleosynthesis decay essentially only by
K-capture: 59Ni (7.6 × 104 y), 57Co (0.74 yr), 56Ni (6d). If acceleration occurs
before decay, the decay will be suppressed since the nuclei are stripped. 56Ni is
absent as expected, but the other two nuclei are more interesting. (135) used ACE
data on these nuclei to show that the delay between synthesis and acceleration is
long compared with the 59Ni decay-time, unless signiﬁcant 59Co is synthesised in
supernovae; considering theoretical 59Co yields they conclude on a delay ≥105 y.
This is inconsistent with models in which supernova accelerate their own ejecta,
but consistent with acceleration of existing interstellar material. The possibility
of in-ﬂight electron attachment complicates the analysis however (135). For more
discussion see (133). A result from TIGER on Co/Ni at 1-5 GeV/n (136) supports
the acceleration delay also at higher energies.
3.4
K-capture isotopes and reacceleration
Analyses using ACE data for 49V, 51V, 51Cr, 52Cr and 49Ti and other nuclei
have been made (73), (137), (74). (137) found that while 51V/52Cr was in better
agreement with reacceleration models, 49Ti/46+47+48Ti gave the opposite result.
(74) ﬁnd that while V/Cr ratios are in slightly better agreement with models
including reacceleration, the ratios involving Ti are inconclusive. (137) used ACE
data on 37Ar, 44Ti, 49V, 51Cr, 55Fe and 57Co, with inconclusive results. The main
problem is the accuracy of the fragmentation cross-sections (126). Discussion of
ACE and previous results can be found in section 3 of (133).


=== PAGE 17 ===
Strong, Moskalenko, and Ptuskin
17
3.5
Anisotropy
High isotropy is a distinctive quality of Galactic CR observed at the Earth. The
global leakage of CR from the Galaxy and the contribution of individual sources
lead to anisotropy but the trajectories of energetic charged particles are highly
tangled by regular and stochastic interstellar magnetic ﬁelds which isotropize
the CR angular distribution. This makes diﬃcult or even impossible the direct
association of detected CR particles with their sources, except for the highest
energy particles. Observations give the amplitude of the ﬁrst angular harmonic
of anisotropy at the level of δ ∼10−3 in the energy range 1012 to 1014 eV where
the most reliable data are available, see (138; 139) and Fig. 12. The angular
distribution of particles at lower energies is signiﬁcantly modulated by the so-
lar wind.
The statistics at higher energies are not good enough yet but the
measurements indicate the anisotropy amplitude at a level of a few percent at
1016 −1018 eV. The data of the Super-Kamiokande-I detector (140) allowed ac-
curate two-dimensional mapping of CR anisotropy at 1013 eV (see also the Tibet
Air Shower Array results (138)). After correction for atmospheric eﬀects, the
deviation from the isotropic event rate is 0.1% with a statistical signiﬁcance of
>5σ and direction to maximum excess at roughly α = 75◦, δ = −5◦.
The amplitude of anisotropy in the diﬀusion approximation is given by the
following equation which includes pure diﬀusion and convection terms:
δ =
−[3D∇f + up (∂f/∂p)]/vf, see (8). Here D is the diﬀusion tensor, and it is as-
sumed that the magnetic inhomogeneities which scatter CR particles are frozen
in the background medium, moving with velocity u ≪v, which gives rise to the
convection term (also called the Compton-Getting term).
The Compton-Getting anisotropy is equal to (γ + 2)u/c for ultra-rerelativistic
CR with a power law spectrum I(E) ∼p2f(p) ∼E−γ. The motion of the Solar
System through the local interstellar medium produces the constant term in the
energy-dependence of the anisotropy ∼4 × 10−4, with a maximum intensity in
the general direction to the Galactic centre region, which does not agree with
the data at 1012 −1014 eV which point to an excess intensity from the anticenter
hemisphere. The convection eﬀect is outweighed by the diﬀusion anisotropy which
is due to the non-uniform distribution of CR in the Galaxy.
The systematic
decrease of CR intensity to the periphery of the Galaxy and the CR ﬂuctuations
produced by nearby SNR are approximately equally important for the formation
of the local CR gradient.
Calculations of CR anisotropy (141) are illustrated in Fig. 12 where the eﬀect
of global leakage from the Galaxy and the overall contribution of known SNR
with distances up to 1 kpc are shown separately. Two basic versions of the ﬂat-
halo diﬀusion model – the plain diﬀusion model with D ∼E0.54 and the model
with reacceleration where Dxx ∼E0.3 – were used in the calculations. The values
of Dxx were taken from (69). The diﬀusion from a few nearby SNR with diﬀerent
ages and distances results in a non-monotonic dependence of anisotropy on energy.
The ﬂux from the Vela SNR probably dominates over other SNR at energies
below about 6×1013 eV in the plain diﬀusion model and below about 1014 eV for
the model with reacceleration. The results of these calculations indicate that the
diﬀusion model with reacceleration is compatible with the data on CR anisotropy
within a factor of about 3. On the other hand it seems that the plain diﬀusion
model with its relatively strong dependence of diﬀusion on energy predicts a too
large anisotropy at E > 1014 eV. It should be stressed that CR diﬀusion is here


=== PAGE 18 ===
18
Cosmic-ray propagation
assumed to be isotropic, which is a seriously simplifying assumption but which
is diﬃcult to avoid because of the complicated and in fact unknown detailed
structure of the Galactic magnetic ﬁeld. The presence of a large-scale random
magnetic ﬁeld justiﬁes the approximation of isotropic diﬀusion on scales larger
than a few hundred parsecs, but the anisotropy is a characteristic which is very
sensitive to the local surroundings of the Solar System including the direction of
magnetic ﬁeld and the value of diﬀusion tensor, see discussion in (8).
3.6
Diﬀuse Galactic Gamma Rays
Gamma rays (above about 100 MeV) from the interstellar medium hold great
promise for CR studies since they originate throughout the Galaxy, not just the
local region of direct measurements. The complementarity of γ-rays and direct
measurements can be exploited to learn most about CR origin and propagation.
Despite this the interpretation has brought surprises in that the γ-ray spectrum
is not just as would be expected from the directly-observed CR spectra.
γ-
rays are produced in the interstellar medium by interactions of CR protons and
He (π0-decay) and electrons (bremsstrahlung) with gas, and electrons with the
interstellar radiation ﬁeld via inverse-Compton scattering.
For details of the
processes the reader is referred to (39; 81; 88; 113). Additional astronomical
material comes into play like the distribution of atomic and molecular gas, and
the interstellar radiation ﬁeld. In fact γ-rays provide an important independent
handle on molecular hydrogen and its relation to its CO molecular tracer, which
has taken its place beside more traditional determinations.
Historically observations started with the OSO-III satellite in 1968, followed
by SAS-2 in 1972, COS-B (1975–1982) and CGRO (1991–2000). Each of these
experiments represented a signiﬁcant leap forward with respect to its predeces-
sor. SAS-2 established the existence of emission from the interstellar medium
and allowed a ﬁrst attempt to derive the CR distribution. With COS-B the CR
distribution could be better derived and it was found not to follow the canonical
distribution of supernova remnants, which posed a problem for the SNR origin
of CR. A rather dependable value for the CO-H2 relation was derived. With
EGRET and COMPTEL on the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory (CGRO)
the improvement in data quality was suﬃcient to allow such studies to be per-
formed in much greater detail. There is now so much relevant information and
theory that a rather ‘realistic’ approach is justiﬁed and indeed necessary. At this
point the best approach seems to be explicit modelling of the high-energy Galaxy
putting in concepts from CR sources and propagation, Galactic structure, etc.
The idea of a single model to reproduce both CR and gamma-ray (and other)
data simultaneously arose naturally and is the goal of the GALPROP project
(see Sec 2.10). For a recent review see (143).
To illustrate the current state of the art, we show spectra and proﬁles from a
recent GALPROP model compared with CGRO/EGRET and COMPTEL data.
This is based on (113) and (144) where full details can be found. The ﬁrst model is
based simply on the directly-measured CR spectra together with a radial gradient
in the CR sources. It is immediately clear that the spectrum is not well predicted,
being below the EGRET data for energies above 1 GeV. However remembering
that this is an unﬁtted prediction, it does show that the basic assumption that
the γ-rays are produced in CR interactions is correct; the factor 2 diﬀerences are
telling us something about the remaining uncertainties. The extent to which the


=== PAGE 19 ===
Strong, Moskalenko, and Ptuskin
19
CR spectra have to be modiﬁed to get a good ﬁt including the GeV excess is shown
in Fig. 13 and the resulting γ-ray model prediction in Fig. 14. The diﬀerence
between the directly-observed and modiﬁed spectra are within plausible limits
considering solar modulation and spatial ﬂuctuations in the Galaxy on scales
>100 pc. A detailed justiﬁcation is lacking however, so this so-called ‘optimized’
model is just an existence proof rather than a conclusive result.
Other more
drastic modiﬁcations to the CR spectrum have been proposed (78) as follows:
(i) a very hard electron injection spectrum, which could be allowed invoking
large ﬂuctuations due to energy losses and the stochastic nature of supernova
remnants in space and time – the solar vicinity is not necessarily a ‘typical’ place
for electron measurements to be representative (145; 81). However the variations
required are even larger than can reasonably be expected (113), so this model
seems unlikely.
(ii) a hard proton spectrum, again invoking spatial variations in the Galaxy
so the solar vicinity is not typical; this is more diﬃcult than for electrons since
the proton energy-losses are negligible. It turns out this possibility can be ruled
out on the basis of antiproton measurements: too many antiprotons would be
produced by the same protons which generate the gamma rays (146; 113; 78).
A related suggestion invokes the dispersion in the radio spectral indices of SNR,
which indicates a dispersion in electron indices and if assumed to apply to CR
protons (147) could produce the GeV excess; this should also be tested against
antiprotons.
Perhaps a completely diﬀerent source of the excess GeV gamma rays is present,
and the possibility of a dark-matter origin has been pursued (148) but found to
produces an excess of CR antiprotons (149). We will not enter this debate here
since it is not directly related to the problem of CR propagation. It does however
show how essential is a good understanding of the CR-induced γ-rays in the
Galaxy for the study of potentially more fundamental physics (150).
The angular distribution of γ-rays provides an essential test for any model. The
problem with the large expected gradient from SNR is critical. The distribution
of SNR is hard to measure because of selection eﬀects, so this problem could be
safely ignored in the past, but now the distribution of pulsars can be determined
with reasonable accuracy and this should trace SNR since supernovae are pulsar
progenitors. The pulsar gradient is indeed larger than originally deduced from
γ-rays as shown in Fig. 15. The distribution of SNR in external galaxies shows a
similar gradient to pulsars (152). The problem therefore remains, but a possible
solution may be found in another uncertainty, the Galactic distribution of molec-
ular hydrogen. Since we have to rely on the CO tracer molecule, any variation
in the relation of CO to H2 will aﬀect the interpretation of the γ-ray data. (144)
noted that there is independent evidence for an increase in the ratio of H2 to CO
with Galactocentric radius, related to Galactic metallicity gradients, and that
this can resolve the problem, allowing CR sources to follow the SNR distribu-
tion as traced by pulsars. Fig. 16 shows longitude and latitude proﬁles based on
such a model, showing a satisfactory agreement with EGRET data. However the
magnitude of the variation in H2 to CO, or its relation to metallicity and other
eﬀects, is uncertain so the issue will need more study. Future data from GLAST
will help by giving much ﬁner angular resolution and the possibility of better
separating the molecular and atomic hydrogen components. Another possible
solution to the gradient puzzle in terms of a radially dependent Galactic wind
was proposed by (70) (see Sections 2.4 and 2.12).


=== PAGE 20 ===
20
Cosmic-ray propagation
Note the large contribution inverse-Compton emission to the spectra and pro-
ﬁles (Figs. 14, 16); this is the reason that the predicted emission is in good
agreement with the EGRET data right up to the highest latitudes (where the
gas-relation pion-decay emission is small). Therefore γ-rays constrain both pro-
tons and electrons, the diﬀerent angular distributions being clearly distinguish-
able. The high-latitude inverse-Compton emission is independent evidence for
the existence of a CR halo extending up to several kpc above the plane, de-
duced from radioactive CR isotopes as explained in Section 3.2. Interestingly,
secondary electrons and positrons make a signiﬁcant contribution to the lower-
energy bremsstrahlung and inverse-Compton gamma-rays (113); so we can in
principle observe secondaries from all over the Galaxy, complementary to the
local direct measurements.
3.7
Antiprotons and positrons
The spectrum and origin of antiprotons in CR has been a matter of active de-
bate since the ﬁrst reported detections in balloon ﬂights (153; 154). There is a
consensus that most of the CR antiprotons observed near the Earth are secon-
daries (155). Due to the kinematics of secondary production, the spectrum of
antiprotons has a unique shape distinguishing it from other cosmic-ray species.
It peaks at about 2 GeV, decreasing sharply towards lower energies. In addition
to secondary antiprotons there are possible sources of primary antiprotons; those
most often discussed are dark matter particle annihilation and evaporation of
primordial black holes.
In recent years, new data with large statistics on both low and high energy
antiproton ﬂuxes have become available (156; 157; 158; 159; 160; 161; 162) thanks
mostly to continuous improvements of the BESS instrument and its systematic
launches every 1-2 years.
This allows one to test models of CR propagation
and heliospheric modulation. Additionally, accurate calculation of the secondary
antiproton ﬂux predicts the “background” for searches for exotic signals such as
WIMP annihilation.
Despite numerous eﬀorts and overall agreement on the secondary nature of
the majority of CR antiprotons, published estimates of the expected ﬂux diﬀer
signiﬁcantly (see, e.g., Fig. 3 in (158)). Calculation of the secondary antiproton
ﬂux is a complicated task. The major sources of uncertainties are three-fold: (i)
incomplete knowledge of cross sections for antiproton production, annihilation,
and scattering, (ii) parameters and models of particle propagation in the Galaxy,
and (iii) modulation in the heliosphere. While the interstellar antiproton ﬂux
is aﬀected only by uncertainties in the cross sections and propagation models,
the ﬁnal comparison with experiment can only be made after correcting for the
solar modulation. Besides, the spectra of CR nucleons have been directly mea-
sured only inside the heliosphere while we need to know the spectrum outside, in
interstellar space, to compute the antiproton production rate correctly.
It has recently been shown (117) that accurate antiproton measurements during
the last solar minimum 1995–1997 (158) are inconsistent with existing propaga-
tion models at the ∼40% level at about 2 GeV, while the stated measurement
uncertainties in this energy range are now ∼20%. The conventional models based
on local CR measurements, simple energy dependence of the diﬀusion coeﬃcient,
and uniform CR source spectra throughout the Galaxy fail to reproduce simul-
taneously both the secondary to primary nuclei ratio and antiproton ﬂux.


=== PAGE 21 ===
Strong, Moskalenko, and Ptuskin
21
A reacceleration model designed to match secondary to primary nuclei ratios
produces too few antiprotons because the diﬀusion coeﬃcient is too large. Models
without reacceleration can reproduce the antiproton ﬂux, but cannot explain the
low-energy decrease in the secondary-to-primary nuclei ratios. To be consistent
with both, the introduction of breaks in the diﬀusion coeﬃcient and the injection
spectrum is required, which would suggest new phenomena in particle acceleration
and propagation. A solution in terms of propagation models requires a break in
the diﬀusion coeﬃcient at a few GeV which has been interpreted as a change in
the propagation mode (117). The latter calculation employs a modern steady-
state drift model of propagation in the heliosphere to predict the proton and
antiproton ﬂuxes near the Earth for diﬀerent modulation levels and magnetic
polarity.
If our local environment inﬂuences the spectrum of CR, then it is possible to
solve the problem by invoking a fresh “unprocessed” nuclei component at low
energies (126), which may be produced in the Local Bubble. The idea is that
primary CR like C and O have a local low-energy component, while secondary
CR like B are produced Galaxy-wide over the conﬁnement time of 10–100 Myr.
In this way an excess of B, which appears when propagation parameters are tuned
to match the ¯p data, can be eliminated by an additional local source of C (see
Section 3.1). The model appears to be able to describe a variety of CR data, but
at the cost of additional parameters.
A consistent ¯p ﬂux in reacceleration models can be obtained if there are addi-
tional sources of protons ∼<20 GeV (163). This energy is above the ¯p production
threshold and eﬀectively produces ¯p’s at ∼<2 GeV. The intensity and spectral
shape of this component could be derived by combining restrictions from ¯p’s and
diﬀuse γ-rays.
It is clear that accurate measurements of ¯p ﬂux are the key to testing cur-
rent propagation models. If new measurements conﬁrm the ¯p “excess,” current
propagation and/or modulation models will face a challenge. If not – it will be
evidence that the reacceleration model is currently the best one to describe the
data. Here we have to await for the next BESS-Polar ﬂight which should bring
much larger statistics, and Pamela (164), currently in orbit.
Positrons in CR were discovered in 1964 (165). The ratio of positrons to elec-
trons is approximately 0.1 above ∼1 GeV as measured near the Earth. Secondary
positrons in CR are mostly the decay products of charged pions and kaons (π+,
K+) produced in CR interactions with interstellar gas. The calculation of the
positron production by CR generally agrees with the data and indicates that
the majority of CR positrons are secondary (166; 39). Some small fraction of
positrons may also come from sources (167), such as pulsar winds (168) or WIMP
annihilations (169).
In interstellar space the secondary positron ﬂux below ∼1 GeV is comparable to
the electron ﬂux which makes positrons non-negligible contributors to the diﬀuse
γ-ray emission in the MeV range (113). The contribution of secondary positrons
and electrons in diﬀuse Galactic γ-ray emission models essentially improves the
agreement with the data, making secondary positrons eﬀectively detectable in
γ-rays.
The accuracy of spacecraft and balloon-borne experiments has substantially in-
creased during the last decade. The data taken by various instruments including
AMS, CAPRICE and HEAT (170; 41; 171; 172) are in agreement with each other
within the error bars, which are however still quite large. A recent measurement


=== PAGE 22 ===
22
Cosmic-ray propagation
of CR positron fraction by the HEAT instrument (42) indicates an excess (fea-
ture) between 5 and 7 GeV at the level of ∼3σ over the smooth prediction of a
propagation model (39). When all the HEAT ﬂights are combined, the data show
an excess above ∼8 GeV, with the most signiﬁcant point at ∼8 GeV (42). The
Pamela satellite (164) currently in orbit, will have a very good positron statistics.
3.8
Electrons and Synchrotron Radiation
CR electrons require a separate treatment from nuclei because of their rapid en-
ergy losses and their link with synchrotron radiation. Their low energy density
compared with nuclei (≈1%) is not yet understood; standard SNR shock acceler-
ation does not predict such a ratio and it is normally a free parameter in models
e.g. (173). Direct measurements extend from MeV to TeV ; at low energies solar
modulation is so large that the interstellar ﬂuxes are really unknown. At TeV
energies the statistics are very poor but new experiments are in progress. Young
SNR contain TeV electrons as is shown by their non-thermal X-ray emission, and
energies up to 100 TeV are possible (174). The rapid energy losses mean that
contributions from old nearby SNR such as Loop 1, Vela, the Cygnus Loop and
MonoGem could make an important contribution to the local electron spectrum
above 100 GeV and dominate above 1 TeV, see Fig. 4 (37). The rapid energy
losses of electrons also produce time- and space-dependent eﬀects described in
the next section. The essential propagation eﬀects are seen in Fig. 13; at energies
below 1 GeV the interstellar spectrum is ﬂatter than the injection spectrum, due
to Coulomb losses; there is an intermediate energy range where the spectrum
is similar to that at injection, and at high energies it steepens due to inverse
Compton and synchrotron losses and energy-dependent diﬀusion. For propaga-
tion models we need an injection spectrum which reproduces the observations;
a typical spectral index is 2.4, similar to nuclei, which produces the observed
high-energy slope of 3.3 (113). The synchrotron spectral index is βν = (γ −1)/2
for an electron index γ; the observed βν = 0.6 −1, increasing with frequency,
implies γ = 2.4 −3 increasing with energy, in satisfactory agreement. Detailed
geometrical models of the Galactic synchrotron emission have been constructed
(175; 176). A more physical interpretation requires propagation and magnetic
ﬁeld modelling as for example in (81). Combined with γ-ray data this allows the
magnetic ﬁeld to be determined as a function of Galactocentric radius indepen-
dent of other techniques (81). Since that work a great deal of new radio data
has become available both from new ground-based surveys and from balloons
and satellites for cosmology (e.g. WMAP). Since Galactic synchrotron is an es-
sential ‘foreground’ for CMB studies there is a large overlap of interest between
these ﬁelds. Exploitation of these data for CR studies has only just begun but is
expected to accelerate with the forthcoming Planck mission.
Radio continuum observations of other galaxies provide a complementary view
of electrons via synchrotron radiation (177; 178). The classical case is the edge-on
galaxy NGC891 (179; 180) which has a non-thermal halo extending to several kpc,
and this helped to give credence to the idea of a large halo in our Galaxy. More
recent observations of this and other edge-on galaxies conﬁrm large halos (181).
The spectral index variations due to energy losses provide a test of propagation in
principle, although this has not been very fruitful up to now. This eﬀect can also
be measured in starburst galaxies (182). Face-on galaxies like M51 show marked
spiral structure in the continuum (177), but this is probably mainly a magnetic-


=== PAGE 23 ===
Strong, Moskalenko, and Ptuskin
23
ﬁeld eﬀect. It is not possible reliably to separate CR and magnetic ﬁeld variations,
although this is often attempted assuming equipartition of energy between CR
and ﬁeld, which although having no ﬁrmly established physical basis nevertheless
gives ﬁeld values quite similar to other methods (183; 178).
The tight radio-continuum/far-infrared correlation for galaxies (184; 185; 186)
is worth mentioning here. It holds both within galaxies (down to 100 pc or less)
and from galaxy to galaxy, and over several orders of magnitude in luminosity; it
presumably contains clues to CR origin and propagation. The ‘CR calorimeter’
(187) is the simplest interpretation. Simply relating both CR production and
UV (reprocessed to far-infrared) to star formation rates is apparently insuﬃcient
to explain the close correlation, and this has given rise to several diﬀerent inter-
pretations including hydrostatic regulation, without being very conclusive as yet
(184; 185; 186).
3.9
Time- and space-dependent eﬀects
CR propagation is usually modelled as a spatially smooth, temporally steady-
state process. Because of the rapid diﬀusion and long containment time-scales in
the Galaxy this is usually a suﬃcient approximation, but there are cases where it
breaks down. The rapid energy loss of electrons above 100 GeV and the stochastic
nature of their sources produces spatial and temporal variations. Supernovae are
stochastic events and each SNR source of CR lasts only perhaps 104 −105 years,
so that they leave their imprint on the distribution of electrons.
This leads
to large ﬂuctuations in the CR electron density at high energies, so that the
electron spectrum measured near the Sun may not be typical (113); a statistical
calculation of this eﬀect can be found in (145; 188) and for local SNR in (37).
These eﬀects are much smaller for nucleons since there are essentially no energy
losses, but they can still be important (189); for the theory of CR ﬂuctuations
for a galaxy with random SNR events see (141) and Section 3.5. Such eﬀects
can inﬂuence the B/C ratio (111; 116) mainly through variations in the primary
spectra. The local bubble can also have an eﬀect on the energy-dependence of
B/C (126). Dispersion in CR injection spectra from SNR may cause the locally
observed spectrum to deviate from the average (147).
4
Summary Points list
Progress in CR research is rapid at the present time with the new generation
of detectors for both direct and indirect measurements. But still it is hard to
pin-down particular theories and even now the origin of the nucleonic component
is not proven (34), although SNR are the leading candidates.
The main points we want to make are
• the importance of considering all relevant data, both direct (particles) and
indirect (γ-ray, synchrotron) measurements
• increase in computing power has made many of the old approximations for
interpreting CR data unnecessary
• new high-quality data will require detailed numerical models


=== PAGE 24 ===
24
Cosmic-ray propagation
5
Future Issues
We end by listing some of the open questions regarding CR propagation which
might be answered with observations in the near future.
• the interpretation of the energy-dependence of the secondary/primary ratio,
requiring accurate measurements at both, low and high energies
• the size of the propagation region – existence of an extended halo, requiring
measurements of radioactive species over a broad energy range
• the relative roles of diﬀusion, convection and reacceleration
• the importance of local sources to the primary CR ﬂux
• the origin of the GeV excess in γ-rays relative to the prediction based on
locally observed CR
• the CR source distribution: is it like SNR or not?
• are positrons and antiprotons explained as secondaries from primary CR or
is there a – perhap exotic – excess?
In addition, on the theoretical side, we mention
• the relation of CR-dynamical models of the Galaxy to CR propagation
theory
6
Related Resources
GALPROP website: http://galprop.stanford.edu,
GLAST website: http://glast.stanford.edu
7
Key terms, deﬁnitions and acronyms
Key terms/deﬁnitions:
Direct measurements: measurements on CR themselves with detectors in bal-
loons and satellites. Indirect measurements: via electromagnetic radiation (γ-
rays and synchrotron) emitted by CR interacting with interstellar matter and
radiation ﬁelds. Primary CR: CR accelerated at sources (for example in SNR).
Secondary CR: CR generated by spallation of primary CR on interstellar gas. p:
particle momentum, R: particle magnetic rigidity = pc/Ze, β: velocity/speed-
of-light, zh: height of CR halo in direction perpendicular to Galactic plane
Acronyms:
ACE: Advanced Composition Explorer, B/C: cosmic-ray Boron-to-Carbon ra-
tio, CMB: cosmic microwave background, CGRO: Compton Gamma Ray Obser-
vatory, CR: cosmic rays, EGRET: Energetic gamma-ray telescope, GALPROP:
Galactic Propagation code, GLAST: Gamma-ray Large Area Telescope, H.E.S.S.:
High Energy Stereoscopic System, ISRF: interstellar radiation ﬁeld, PLD: path-
length distribution, SNR: supernova remnant
8
Acknowledgements
I.V.M. acknowledges partial support from a NASA Astronomy and Physics Re-
search and Analysis Program (APRA) grant.


=== PAGE 25 ===
Strong, Moskalenko, and Ptuskin
25
References
1. Shapiro MM, Silberberg R. Annu. Rev. Nuclear and Particle Sci. 20:323
(1970)
2. Wentzel DG. Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 12:71 (1974)
3. Simpson JA. Annu. Rev. Nuclear and Particle Sci. 33:323 (1983)
4. Cesarsky CJ. Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 18:289 (1980)
5. Cox DP. Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 43:337 (2005)
6. Elmegreen BG, Scalo J. Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 42:211 (2004)
7. Scalo J, Elmegreen BG. Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 42:275 (2004)
8. Berezinskii VS, Bulanov SV, Dogiel VA, Ptuskin VS. Astrophysics of cosmic
rays, edited by VL Ginzburg. Amsterdam: North-Holland (1990)
9. Ginzburg VL, Syrovatskii SI. The Origin of Cosmic Rays. New York:
Macmillan (1964)
10. Ginzburg VL, Ptuskin VS. Rev. Mod. Phys. 48:161 (1976)
11. Hillas AM. Cosmic rays, The Commonwealth and International Library,
Selected Readings in Physics. Oxford: Pergamon Press (1972)
12. Gaisser TK. Cosmic rays and particle physics, 292 p. Cambridge and New
York: Cambridge University Press, 1990
13. Stanev T. High energy cosmic rays, Praxis Books in Astrophysics and As-
tronomy. Chichester, UK: Springer (2004)
14. Schlickeiser R. Cosmic ray astrophysics, Astronomy and Astrophysics Li-
brary. Berlin: Springer (2002)
15. Diehl R, Parizot E, Kallenbach R, von Steiger R. in The Astrophysics of
Galactic Cosmic Rays. Dordrecht: Kluwer (2002)
16. Nagano M, Watson AA. Rev. Mod. Phys. 72:689 (2000)
17. Cronin JW. Nucl. Phys. B, Proc. Supp. 138:465 (2005)
18. H¨orandel JR. astro-ph/0508014 (2005); Journal of Physics: Conference Se-
ries 47:41 (2006)
19. Engel R. Nucl. Phys. B, Proc. Supp. 151:437 (2006)
20. Stanev T. in AIP Conf. Proc. 698: Intersections of Particle and Nuclear
Physics, p.357. New York: AIP (2004)
21. Berezinsky V, Gazizov A, Grigorieva S. Nucl. Phys. B, Proc. Supp. 136:147
(2004)
22. Berezinsky V, Gazizov A, Kachelrieß M. astro-ph/0612247 (2006); Phys.
Rev. Lett. 97:231101 (2006)
23. Hooper D, Sarkar S, Taylor AM. astro-ph/0608085 (2006)
24. H¨orandel JR. Astropart. Phys. 21:241 (2004)
25. Hillas AM. astro-ph/0607109 (2006)
26. Gaisser TK. astro-ph/0608553 (2006)
27. Kampert KH. astro-ph/0611884 (2006)
28. Webber WR. Astrophys. J. 506:329 (1998)


=== PAGE 26 ===
26
Cosmic-ray propagation
29. Fatuzzo M, Adams FC, Melia F. Astrophys. J. 653:L49 (2006)
30. Hanasz M, Lesch H. Astron. Astrophys. 412:331 (2003)
31. Snodin AP, Brandenburg A, Mee AJ, Shukurov A. MNRAS 373:643 (2006)
32. Zirakashvili VN, Breitschwerdt D, Ptuskin VS, V¨olk HJ. Astron. Astrophys.
311:113 (1996)
33. Ptuskin VS, V¨olk HJ, Zirakashvili VN, Breitschwerdt D. Astron. Astrophys.
321:434 (1997)
34. Aharonian F, et al. Astron. Astrophys. 449:223 (2006)
35. Panov AD, et al. astro-ph/0612377 (2006)
36. Derbina VA, et al. Astrophys. J. 628:L41 (2005)
37. Kobayashi T, Komori Y, Yoshida K, Nishimura J. Astrophys. J. 601:340
(2004)
38. Grimani C, et al. Astron. Astrophys. 392:287 (2002)
39. Moskalenko IV, Strong AW. Astrophys. J. 493:694 (1998)
40. Stephens SA. Adv. Spa. Res. 27:687 (2001)
41. Gast H, Olzem J, Schael S. astro-ph/0605254 (2006)
42. Beatty JJ, et al. Phys. Rev. Lett. 93:241102 (2004)
43. Moskalenko IV, Strong AW, Ormes JF, Mashnik SG. Adv. Spa. Res. 35:156
(2005)
44. Bradt HL, Peters B. Phys. Rev. 80:943 (1950)
45. Garcia-Munoz M, Mason GM, Simpson JA. Astrophys. J. 201:L145 (1975)
46. Seo ES, Ptuskin VS. Astrophys. J. 431:705 (1994)
47. Webber WR. Space Sci. Rev. 86:239 (1998)
48. Wiedenbeck ME, et al. Space Sci. Rev. 99:15 (2001)
49. Connell JJ. Space Sci. Rev. 99:41 (2001)
50. Binns WR, et al. Astrophys. J. 634:351 (2005)
51. Kennel C, Engelmann F. Phys. Fluids 9:2377 (1966)
52. Casse F, Lemoine M, Pelletier G. Phys. Rev. D. 65:023002 (2002)
53. Jokipii JR. Reviews of Geophysics and Space Physics 9:27 (1971)
54. Toptygin IN. Cosmic Rays in Interplanetary Magnetic Fields. Dordrecht:
Reidel (1985)
55. Goldreich P, Sridhar S. Astrophys. J. 438:763 (1995)
56. Yan H, Lazarian A. Astrophys. J. 614:757 (2004)
57. Breitschwerdt D, Komossa S. Astrophys. Sp. Sci. 272:3 (2000)
58. Breitschwerdt D, V¨olk HJ, McKenzie JF. Astron. Astrophys. 245:79 (1991)
59. Breitschwerdt D, McKenzie JF, V¨olk HJ. Astron. Astrophys. 269:54 (1993)
60. Jokipii JR. Astrophys. J. 208:900 (1976)
61. Owens AJ, Jokipii JR. Astrophys. J. 215:677 (1977)
62. Owens AJ, Jokipii JR. Astrophys. J. 215:685 (1977)
63. Jones FC. Astrophys. J. 222:1097 (1978)


=== PAGE 27 ===
Strong, Moskalenko, and Ptuskin
27
64. Jones FC. Astrophys. J. 229:747 (1979)
65. Bloemen JBGM, Dogel’ VA, Dorman VL, Ptuskin VS. Astron. Astrophys.
267:372 (1993)
66. Veilleux S, Cecil G, Bland-Hawthorn J. Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys.
43:769 (2005)
67. Strong AW, Moskalenko IV. Astrophys. J. 509:212 (1998)
68. Maurin D, Taillet R, Donato F. Astron. Astrophys. 394:1039 (2002)
69. Jones FC, Lukasiak A, Ptuskin V, Webber W. Astrophys. J. 547:264 (2001)
70. Breitschwerdt D, Dogiel VA, V¨olk HJ. Astron. Astrophys. 385:216 (2002)
71. Simon M, Heinrich W, Mathis KD. Astrophys. J. 300:32 (1986)
72. Letaw JR, Adams JHJr., Silberberg R, Tsao CH. Astrophys. Sp. Sci. 114:365
(1985)
73. Niebur SM, et al. in AIP Conf. Proc. 528: Acceleration and Transport of
Energetic Particles Observed in the Heliosphere, ed. RA Mewaldt et al.,
p.406. New York: AIP (2000)
74. Jones FC, Lukasiak A, Ptuskin VS, Webber WR. Adv. Spa. Res. 27:737
(2001)
75. Ptuskin VS, et al. Astrophys. J. 642:902 (2006)
76. Wandel A, et al. Astrophys. J. 316:676 (1987)
77. Berezhko EG, et al. Astron. Astrophys. 410:189 (2003)
78. Moskalenko IV, Strong AW, Reimer O. in ASSL Vol. 304: Cosmic Gamma-
Ray Sources, eds. KS Cheng and GE Romero, G. E., p.279. Dordrecht:
Kluwer (2004)
79. Beck R. Space Sci. Rev. 99:243 (2001)
80. Han JL, et al. Astrophys. J. 642:868 (2006)
81. Strong AW, Moskalenko IV, Reimer O. Astrophys. J. 537:763 (2000)
82. Alvarez-Mu˜niz J, Engel R, Stanev T. Astrophys. J. 572:185 (2002)
83. Takami H, Yoshiguchi H, Sato K. Astrophys. J. 639:803 (2006)
84. Kachelriess M, Serpico PD, Teshima M. astro-ph/0510444 (2005)
85. Moskalenko IV, Porter TA, Strong AW. Astrophys. J. 640:L155 (2006)
86. Frisch PC, Slavin JD. astro-ph/0606743 (2006)
87. Frisch PC. ASSL Vol. 338: Solar Journey: The Signiﬁcance of our Galactic
Environment for the Heliosphere and Earth. Dordrecht: Springer (2006)
88. Moskalenko IV, Strong AW. Astrophys. J. 528:357 (2000)
89. Kamae T, et al. Astrophys. J. 647:692 (2006)
90. Kelner SR, Aharonian FA, Bugayov VV. Phys. Rev. D. 74:034018 (2006)
91. M¨uller D, et al. Space Sci. Rev. 99:353 (2001)
92. Mashnik SG, et al. Adv. Spa. Res. 34:1288 (2004)
93. Moskalenko IV, Strong AW, Mashnik SG. in AIP Conf. Proc. 769: Int.
Conf. on Nuclear Data for Science and Technology, eds. RC Haight et al.,
p.1612. New York: AIP (2005)


=== PAGE 28 ===
28
Cosmic-ray propagation
94. de Nolfo GA, et al. Adv. Spa. Res. 38:1558 (2006)
95. Endt PM, van der Leun C. Nucl. Phys. A 310:1 (1978)
96. Mart´ınez-Pinedo G, Vogel P. Phys. Rev. Lett. 81:281 (1998)
97. Wuosmaa AH, et al. Phys. Rev. Lett. 80:2085 (1998)
98. Strong AW, Moskalenko IV. Adv. Spa. Res. 27:717 (2001)
99. Davis LJr.. Proc. 6th Int. Cosmic Ray Conf. (Moscow) 3:220 (1960)
100. Protheroe RJ, Ormes JF, Comstock GM. Astrophys. J. 247:362 (1981)
101. Garcia-Munoz M, et al. Astrophys. J. Suppl. 64:269 (1987)
102. Ptuskin VS, Jones FC, Ormes JF. Astrophys. J. 465:972 (1996)
103. Stephens SA, Streitmatter RE. Astrophys. J. 505:266 (1998)
104. Davis AJ, et al. in AIP Conf. Proc. 528: Acceleration and Transport of
Energetic Particles Observed in the Heliosphere, eds. RA Mewaldt et al.,
p.421. New York: AIP (2000)
105. Webber WR. Astrophys. J. 402:188 (1993)
106. Duvernois MA, Simpson JA, Thayer MR. Astron. Astrophys. 316:555 (1996)
107. Ptuskin VS, Soutoul A. Astron. Astrophys. 237:445 (1990)
108. Ptuskin VS, Soutoul A. Astron. Astrophys. 337:859 (1998)
109. Webber WR, Lee MA, Gupta M. Astrophys. J. 390:96 (1992)
110. Maurin D, Donato F, Taillet R, Salati P. Astrophys. J. 555:585 (2001)
111. Taillet R, et al. Astrophys. J. 609:173 (2004)
112. Higdon JC, Lingenfelter RE. Astrophys. J. 582:330 (2003)
113. Strong AW, Moskalenko IV, Reimer O. Astrophys. J. 613:962 (2004)
114. Shibata T, Hareyama M, Nakazawa M, Saito C. Astrophys. J. 612:238 (2004)
115. Shibata T, Hareyama M, Nakazawa M, Saito C. Astrophys. J. 642:882 (2006)
116. B¨usching I, et al. Astrophys. J. 619:314 (2005)
117. Moskalenko IV, Strong AW, Ormes JF, Potgieter MS. Astrophys. J. 565:280
(2002)
118. Wallace JM. Astrophys. J. 245:753 (1981)
119. Hanasz M, Lesch H. Astrophys. J. 543:235 (2000)
120. Giacalone J, Jokipii JR. Astrophys. J. 520:204 (1999)
121. Hanasz M, Kowal G, Otmianowska-Mazur K, Lesch H. Astrophys. J. 605:L33
(2004)
122. Moskalenko IV, Mashnik SG. Proc. 28th Int. Cosmic Ray Conf. (Tsukuba)
4:1969 (2003)
123. Webber WR, McDonald FB, Lukasiak A. Astrophys. J. 599:582 (2003)
124. Shalchi A, Bieber JW, Matthaeus WH, Qin G. Astrophys. J. 616:617 (2004)
125. Shalchi A, Schlickeiser R. Astrophys. J. 626:L97 (2005)
126. Moskalenko IV, Strong AW, Mashnik SG, Ormes JF. Astrophys. J. 586:1050
(2003)
127. Donato F, Maurin D, Taillet R. Astron. Astrophys. 381:539 (2002)


=== PAGE 29 ===
Strong, Moskalenko, and Ptuskin
29
128. Moskalenko IV, Mashnik SG, Strong AW. Proc. 27th Int. Cosmic Ray Conf.
(Hamburg) 5:1836 (2001)
129. Hams T, et al. Astrophys. J. 611:892 (2004)
130. Streitmatter RE, Stephens SA. Adv. Spa. Res. 27:743 (2001)
131. Ptuskin VS, Soutoul A. Space Sci. Rev. 86:225 (1998)
132. Yanasak NE, et al. Astrophys. J. 563:768 (2001)
133. Mewaldt RA, et al. Space Sci. Rev. 99:27 (2001)
134. Mueller HR, Frisch PC, Florinski V, Zank GP. astro-ph/0607600 (2006)
135. Wiedenbeck ME, et al. in AIP Conf. Proc. 528: Acceleration and Transport
of Energetic Particles Observed in the Heliosphere, p.363. New York: AIP
(2000)
136. de Nolfo GA, et al.. Proc. 29th Int. Cosmic Ray Conf. (Pune) 3:61 (2005)
137. Niebur SM, et al. Proc. 27th Int. Cosmic Ray Conf. (Hamburg) 5:1675 (2001)
138. Amenomori M, et al. Astrophys. J. 626:L29 (2005)
139. Tada J, et al. Nucl. Phys. B, Proc. Supp. 151:485 (2006)
140. Guillian G. Proc. 29th Int. Cosmic Ray Conf. (Pune) 6:85 (2005)
141. Ptuskin VS, Jones FC, Seo ES, Sina R. Adv. Spa. Res. 37:1909 (2006)
142. Ambrosio M, et al. Phys. Rev. D. 67:042002 (2003)
143. Moskalenko IV, Strong AW. in AIP Conf. Proc. 801: Astrophysical Sources
of High Energy Particles and Radiation, eds. T Bulik et al., p.57. New York:
AIP (2005)
144. Strong AW, et al. Astron. Astrophys. 422:L47 (2004)
145. Pohl M, Esposito JA. Astrophys. J. 507:327 (1998)
146. Moskalenko IV, Strong AW, Reimer O. Astron. Astrophys. 338:L75 (1998)
147. B¨usching I, Pohl M, Schlickeiser R. Astron. Astrophys. 377:1056 (2001)
148. de Boer W, et al. Astron. Astrophys. 444:51 (2005)
149. Bergstr¨om L, Edsj¨o J, Gustafsson M, Salati P. JCAP 5:6 (2006)
150. Moskalenko IV, et al. astro-ph/0609768 (2006)
151. Strong AW, et al. Astron. Astrophys. 444:495 (2005)
152. Sasaki M, Breitschwerdt D, Supper R. Astrophys. Sp. Sci. 289:283 (2004)
153. Golden RL, et al. Phys. Rev. Lett. 43:1196 (1979)
154. Bogomolov EA, et al. Proc. 19th Int. Cosmic Ray Conf. (La Jolla) 2:362
(1985)
155. Mitchell JW, et al. Phys. Rev. Lett. 76:3057 (1996)
156. Hof M, et al. Astrophys. J. 467:L33 (1996)
157. Grimani C, et al. Astron. Astrophys. 392:287 (2002)
158. Orito S, et al. Phys. Rev. Lett. 84:1078 (2000)
159. Bergstr¨om D, et al. Astrophys. J. 534:L177 (2000)
160. Sanuki T, et al. Astrophys. J. 545:1135 (2000)
161. Maeno T, et al. Astropart. Phys. 16:121 (2001)


=== PAGE 30 ===
30
Cosmic-ray propagation
162. Asaoka Y, et al. Phys. Rev. Lett. 88:051101 (2002)
163. Moskalenko IV, Strong AW, Mashnik SG, Ormes JF. Proc. 28th Int. Cosmic
Ray Conf. (Tsukuba) 4:1921 (2003)
164. Picozza P, et al. astro-ph/0608697 (2006)
165. de Shong JA, Hildebrand RH, Meyer P. Phys. Rev. Lett. 12:3 (1964)
166. Protheroe RJ. Astrophys. J. 254:391 (1982)
167. Coutu S, et al. Astropart. Phys. 11:429 (1999)
168. Chi X, Cheng KS, Young ECM. Astrophys. J. 459:L83 (1996)
169. Baltz EA, Edsj¨o J. Phys. Rev. D. 59:023511 (1999)
170. AMS Collaboration, et al. Phys. Rep. 366:331 (2002)
171. Boezio M, et al. Astrophys. J. 532:653 (2000)
172. DuVernois MA, et al. Astrophys. J. 559:296 (2001)
173. Ellison DC. Space Sci. Rev. 99:305 (2001)
174. Allen G. Proc. 26th Int. Cosmic Ray Conf. (Salt Lake City) 3:480 (1999)
175. Beuermann K, Kanbach G, Berkhuijsen EM. Astron. Astrophys. 153:17
(1985)
176. Broadbent A, Haslam TCG, Osborne LJ. Proc. 21st Int. Cosmic Ray Conf.
(Adelaide) 3:229 (1990)
177. Beck R. in The Magnetized Plasma in Galaxy Evolution, eds. KT Chyzy et
al., p.193. Krak´ow: Jagiellonian University (2005)
178. Beck R. astro-ph/0603531 (2006)
179. Allen RJ, Sancisi R, Baldwin JE. Astron. Astrophys. 62:397 (1978)
180. Heald GH, Rand RJ, Benjamin RA, Bershady MA. Astrophys. J. 647:1018
(2006)
181. Dumke M, Krause M. in LNP Vol. 506: Proc. IAU Colloq. 166, The Local
Bubble and Beyond, eds. D Breitschwerdt et al., p.555. Berlin: Springer
(1998)
182. Heesen V, Krause M, Beck R, Dettmar RJ. in The Magnetized Plasma in
Galaxy Evolution, eds. KT Chyzy et al., p.156. Krak´ow: Jagiellonian Uni-
versity (2005)
183. Beck R, Krause M. Astronomische Nachrichten 326:414 (2005)
184. Niklas S, Beck R. Astron. Astrophys. 320:54 (1997)
185. Murgia M, et al. Astron. Astrophys. 437:389 (2005)
186. Paladino R, et al. Astron. Astrophys. 456:847 (2006)
187. V¨olk HJ. Astron. Astrophys. 218:67 (1989)
188. Strong AW, Moskalenko IV. Proc. 27th Int. Cosmic Ray Conf. (Hamburg)
5:1964 (2001)
189. Erlykin AD, Wolfendale AW. J. Phys. G: Nucl. Part. Phys. 28:359 (2002)


=== PAGE 31 ===
Strong, Moskalenko, and Ptuskin
31
10 2
10 3
10 4
Flux dΦ/dE0 ⋅ E0 2.5 [m-2 sr-1 s-1 GeV1.5]
N N
N N N N N N N N N
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
  
 
 
  






















Proton
KASCADE QGSJET
KASCADE SIBYLL
   GRAPES-3 QGS
   GRAPES-3 SIB
Tibet-BD (HD)
KASCADE SH
!   Tibet-ASγ (HD)
EAS-TOP SH
    Mt. Chacaltaya
N   HEGRA
Mt. Fuji
EAS-TOP
¤
¤
¤
¤
¤
¤
¤
⊕⊕⊕⊕
⊕
⊕
⊗⊗⊗⊗⊗⊗⊗⊗⊗⊗⊗
















∅
∅∅
∅
∅
∅
∅
∅
∇∇∇∇∇∇∇∇∇∇∇∇
" " " " " " " " "
" " " "
  
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
⊗
AMS
/
ATIC

BESS
"
CAPRICE 98
¤
HEAT
Ichimura
∇
IMAX
JACEE

MASS
Papini
RUNJOB
⊕
RICH-II
Ryan
Smith
SOKOL
∅
Zatsepin
10 2
10 3
10 4
Flux dΦ/dE0 ⋅ E0 2.5 [m-2 sr-1 s-1 GeV1.5]



 


 





 






Helium
KASCADE QGSJET
KASCADE SIBYLL
   GRAPES-3 QGS
   GRAPES-3 SIB
Tibet-BD (HD)
Mt. Fuji
¤
¤
¤
¤
¤
¤
¤
⊕
⊕⊕⊕⊕
⊕



















  
∇∇∇∇∇∇∇
∇∇∇
∇∇∇
∇
∇
"""""""
"
"
"
"
"
"
"
"
????? ? ?? ??
?
?
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
ATIC

BESS
"
CAPRICE 98
¤
HEAT
Ichimura
∇
IMAX
JACEE

MASS
Papini
⊕
RICH-II
RUNJOB
Smith
SOKOL
?
Webber
10 2
10 3
10 4
10
2
10
3
10
4
10
5
10
6
10
7
10
8
Energy E0 [GeV]
Flux dΦ/dE0 ⋅ E0 2.5 [m-2 sr-1 s-1 GeV1.5]















  
 
 
Iron
KASCADE QGSJET
KASCADE SIBYLL
   GRAPES-3 QGS
   GRAPES-3 SIB
EAS-TOP

 



 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 


 




∇
∇
∇
∇
∇
∇
???
? ? ? ?
?
""""
" "
"
"
""
"
/ / // //
/ / / /
/ //
/ /
/
/
/
/
ATIC
CRN
HEAO-3

Hareyama
Ichimura
JACEE
∇
Juliusson
?
Minagawa
RUNJOB
SOKOL
"
TRACER
Figure 1: Compilation of spectral data 1010 −1017 eV for p, He, Fe, combining
balloon, satellite and ground-based measurements. From (18) and G. H¨orandel,
private communication.
Energy per particle, GeV
10
2
10
3
10
4
10
5
10
Energy per particle, GeV
10
2
10
3
10
4
10
5
10
1.75
(GeV)
-1
ster
-1
s
-2
, m
2.75
 E
×
Flux 
4
10
5
10
ATIC, p
AMS, p
CAPRICE98, p
BESS-TeV, p
ATIC, He
AMS, He
CAPRICE98, He
BESS-TeV, He
Figure 2: Preliminary spectra of p, He from ATIC-2, compared with AMS01,
BESS-TeV and CAPRICE98. Plot from ATIC collaboration (35). The ATIC-2
data indicate a slighly harder spectrum for He above 1 TeV.


=== PAGE 32 ===
32
Cosmic-ray propagation
Energy per particle, GeV
1
10
2
10
3
10
4
10
5
10
6
10
Energy per particle, GeV
1
10
2
10
3
10
4
10
5
10
6
10
1.75
(GeV)
-1
ster
-1
s
-2
, m
2.75
 E
×
Flux 
-3
10
-2
10
-1
10
1
10
2
10
3
10
4
10
C
 0.01
×
O 
ATIC
HEAO-3-C2
CRN
TRACER
 0.0001
×
Ne 
Energy per particle, GeV
1
10
2
10
3
10
4
10
5
10
6
10
Energy per particle, GeV
1
10
2
10
3
10
4
10
5
10
6
10
-3
10
-2
10
-1
10
1
10
2
10
3
10
4
10
Mg
 0.01
×
Si 
ATIC
HEAO-3-C2
CRN
TRACER
 0.0001
×
Fe 
Figure 3: Compilation of spectral data for element groups CNO, NeMgSi, Fe
(36) from HEAO-3, SANRIKU, CRN, SOKOL, JACEE and RUNJOB (upper)
and of separate even-Z elements from preliminary ATIC-2, HEAO-3, CRN and
TRACER (lower). Plot from ATIC collaboration (35). The ATIC-2 data suggest
a hardening above 10 TeV.


=== PAGE 33 ===
Strong, Moskalenko, and Ptuskin
33
Figure
4:
Measurements
of
the
electron
spectrum,
including
AMS01,
CAPRICE94, HEAT and SANRIKU, compared with possible contributions of
distant sources and local supernova remnants, from (37).
Figure 5: Measurements of the positron spectrum, including data from MASS91,
AMS01, CAPRICE94 and HEAT, from (38). Propagation calculations for in-
terstellar (upper curves) and modulated (lower curves) are shown. Dotted, dot-
dashed: GALPROP (39); dashed, solid: (40).


=== PAGE 34 ===
34
Cosmic-ray propagation
Momentum [GeV/c]
1
2
3
4 5 6 78 10
20
30 40
 -1
 sr s Gev]
2
Flux [m
-5
10
-4
10
-3
10
-2
10
-1
10
1
10
2
10
3
10
4
10
Electrons (this analysis)
Positrons (this analysis)
AMS-01 electrons
AMS-01 positrons
 positrons
±
HEAT-e
Electron and positron fluxes
Electrons (this analysis)
Positrons (this analysis)
AMS-01 electrons
AMS-01 positrons
 positrons
±
HEAT-e
Figure 6: Left: Measurements of the electron and positron spectrum by AMS01
and HEAT, from (41). Right: e+/(e+ + e−) ratio including HEAT and AMS01
(42).
For the ratio a propagation calculation (39) is shown by the solid line,
and possible contributions from pulsars (dashed) and dark matter annihiliations
(dash-dot).
0.001
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
Flux, m-2 s-1 sr-1 GeV-1
Kinetic energy, GeV
Antiprotons
Φ = 550 MV
G BESS 95-97
K BESS 98
I MASS91
∆ CAPRICE98
Tertiary
42.2–111347
42.2–111343
42.2–111344
LIS
Figure 7: Measurements of the antiproton spectrum from MASS91, CAPRICE98
and BESS, compared to a propagation calculation, from (43). The dashed and
dotted lines illustrate the sensitivity of the calculated (modulated) antiproton ﬂux
to the normalization of the diﬀusion coeﬃcient. LIS marks the local interstellar
spectrum.


=== PAGE 35 ===
Strong, Moskalenko, and Ptuskin
35
Figure 8: B/C and sub-Fe/Fe data compilation compared to four models treated
by the modiﬁed weighted-slab technique, from (69).
Figure 9: Data compilation for spectra of C and Fe compared to four models
treated by the modiﬁed weighted-slab technique, from (69).


=== PAGE 36 ===
36
Cosmic-ray propagation
1027
1028
1029
1030
1031
10-1
100
101
102
103
104
Dxx, cm2 s-1
Rigidity, GV
 0
 0.05
 0.1
 0.15
 0.2
 0.25
 0.3
 0.35
10-2
10-1
100
101
102
103
Kinetic energy, GeV/nucleon
B/C ratio
DRD model
Φ = 450 MV
M Voyager
G Ulysses
H ACE
L HEAO-3
K Chapell,Webber 1981
I Dwyer 1978
∇ Maehl et al. 1977
LIS
44–999714kr
101
102
103
10-1
100
101
102
103
104
E2 Flux, GeV m-2 s-1 sr-1
Kinetic energy, GeV
PROTONS
H AMS I
∇ BESS 98
G CAPRICE 94
K IMAX 92
L LEAP 87
 Sokol, JACEE
DRD model
Φ = 550 MV
44–999714kr
10-4
10-3
10-2
10-2
10-1
100
101
102
Flux, m-2 s-1 sr-1 GeV-1
Kinetic energy, GeV
ANTIPROTONS
DRD model
Φ = 550 MV
G BESS 95-97
K BESS 98
I MASS 91
∆ CAPRICE 98
Tertiary
LIS
44–999714kr
Figure 10:
Upper left: diﬀusion coeﬃcient in diﬀerent models (75): plain diﬀu-
sion (dots), Kolmogorov reacceleration (dashes), and Kraichnan-type reacceler-
ation with wave-damping (solid). Upper right: B/C, lower left: protons, lower
right: antiprotons, in the wave-damping model (75). LIS marks the local inter-
stellar spectrum.
Figure 11:
Data on energy-dependence of 10Be/9Be including ACE, Ulysses,
Voyager, IMP, ISEE-3 and ISOMAX data, from (129). The solid line is a diﬀusive
halo model with 4 kpc scale height using GALPROP (98) the other lines are
leaky-box models (130).


=== PAGE 37 ===
Strong, Moskalenko, and Ptuskin
37
Figure 12: The anisotropy of cosmic rays in the reacceleration (red curves) and
the plain diﬀusion (blue curves) models. Separately shown are the eﬀects of the
global leakage from the Galaxy (thick lines), and the contribution from local SNR
(thin lines). The collection of data on cosmic ray anisotropy (yellow squares) are
taken from (142) where the references to individual experiments can be found.
100
1000
0.1
1
10
100
1000
E2 Flux, GeV m-2 s-1 sr-1
Kinetic energy, GeV
PROTONS
H AMS I
∇ BESS 98
G CAPRICE 94
K IMAX 92
L LEAP 87
Φ = 650 MV
44–500080
44–500090
 0.01
 0.1
 1
 10
 100
 0.1
 1
 10
 100
 1000
E2 Flux, GeV m-2 s-1 sr-1
Kinetic energy, GeV
ELECTRONS
44–500180
44–500181
44–500190
H AMS I
G CAPRICE 94
K HEAT 94-95
L MASS 91
∇ Sanriku
LIS
Φ = 600 MV
Figure 13:
Directly-observed (solid), and modiﬁed (dots) proton and electron
spectra. The modiﬁed spectra are deduced from ﬁts to antiproton and γ-ray data
(113). LIS marks local interstellar spectra. Data shown are from AMS01, BESS,
CAPRICE94, IMAX, LEAP, HEAT, MASS91, SANRIKU.


=== PAGE 38 ===
38
Cosmic-ray propagation
energy, MeV                 
1
10
2
10
3
10
4
10
5
10
6
10
 MeV   
-1
 s
-1
 sr
-2
. intensity, cm
2
E
-4
10
-3
10
-2
10
energy, MeV                 
1
10
2
10
3
10
4
10
5
10
6
10
 MeV   
-1
 s
-1
 sr
-2
. intensity, cm
2
E
-4
10
-3
10
-2
10
Figure 14: γ-ray spectrum of inner Galaxy (330◦< l < 30◦, |b| < 5◦) for model
based on the directly-observed CR spectra and modiﬁed spectra shown in Fig. 13.
Red bars: EGRET data, including points above 10 GeV, see (151). Green bars:
COMPTEL. Light blue line: bremsstrahlung, green line: inverse Compton scat-
tering, red line: π0-decay, black line: extragalactic background, dark blue line:
total. This is an update of the spectra shown in (113).
Figure 15: Possible CR source distributions as function of Galactocentric radius
R: pulsars (solid line), SNR (vertical bars), from γ-rays assuming constant H2-
to-CO relation (dotted line) (144).


=== PAGE 39 ===
Strong, Moskalenko, and Ptuskin
39
  
-1
 s
-1
 sr
-2
intensity, cm
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
-4
10
×
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
Galactic longitude
180
200
220
240
260
280
300
320
340
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
Galactic longitude
180
200
220
240
260
280
300
320
340
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
Galactic longitude
180
200
220
240
260
280
300
320
340
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
Galactic longitude
180
200
220
240
260
280
300
320
340
  -5.50<b<-0.50 ,  0.50<b< 5.50
  1000 -  2000 MeV
 galdef ID 45_600202
Galactic latitude
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
   
-1
 s
-1
 sr
-2
intensity, cm
-7
10
-6
10
-5
10
-4
10
   0.50<l<30.50 , 330.50<l<359.50
  1000 -  2000 MeV
 galdef ID 45_600202
Figure 16: γ-ray longitude and latitude proﬁles, for model with pulsar source
distribution and Xco varying with radius (144). Light blue line: bremsstrahlung,
green line: inverse Compton scattering, red line: π0-decay, black line: extragalac-
tic background, dark blue line: total.
